Yeah. Good morning,
Gary.
Right. Good morning, and welcome to the Social Services and Community Select
Committee. We are again hearing submissions today
on the Disability Support Services Bill.
And as said, yes, I'll just
say it again for all those watching.
We look forward to hearing from submitters, and we're
particularly interested as a committee in hearing
three things if submitters wish to address those.
It's one, what changes do you want to see in the bill?
Two, what is your biggest concern? And three, what will your solution be?
And just before we go away, I'll just go around quickly around the table, just
so everyone gets a chance to say who they are and which area they represent.
So I'm Joseph Moody. I'm the member for Palmerston North and the chair of the
committee.
I'm Dana Cooper Patrick, the MP for East Coast and
Deputy Chair of the committee.
My name is Maureen Pugh. I am the MP for West Coast
Tasman, and for low vision people, I've got short, brown
hair. I'm wearing a black top with large white
spots.
And my name is Laura McClure. I am an Act List MP based in
Christchurch and a disability spokesperson, and I am
wearing a pink blazer, and I've got medium length blonde hair.
Hi, I'm Jamie Arbuckle, list MP for New Zealand First, living in the
top of the south.
And you're the good-looking one.
Morena tatou. My name is Marama Fox.
I'm the Member of Parliament Maori for Te Tai Tokerau,
and I've got large glasses on and
white
fluffy hair.
Oh, fluffy.
Kia ora.
Well, kia ora e te whanau. Ko Kahurangi Carter toku ingoa.
I am a Green Party list MP based in Christchurch Central.
I am the disability spokesperson for the Greens, and I
have a white shirt
which has a little bow tie and a
black bow in my hair, and look forward to hearing from you all today. Thank you.
Yes.
And kia ora koutou. Ko Willow-Jean Prime toku ingoa. My name is Willow-Jean Prime.
I'm a Labor list MP based in Te Tai Tokerau,
and I am Labor's spokesperson for social development and employment, and also
for tamariki children.
Kia ora. My name's Helen White. I'm the MP for Mount Albert.
I have the portfolio for the prevention of family
and sexual violence, and I also have
a portfolio which is community and voluntary.
Thank you.
Oh,
good morning, Jonathan. Thank you for being with us this morning online.
We have five minutes with you this morning.
The time is yours. Welcome.
Yeah. Thank you. Can I just check you can hear me?
We certainly can. Yep. See and hear you loudly.
Right. Lovely. Look, I'm
actually coming in to you from Melbourne where I'm doing some work this week,
and it's not lost on me that the disabled people of Australia have it a
lot better off than the disabled people of New Zealand in terms of the
dignity and respect that is offered to them by the way
supports are upholding and advancing their
rights, freedoms
in life.
And I have to tell you that I really hope that
that audio description, which isn't really much use for me,
I hope that that is not the last respect that you show for disabled
people in this process. Because this bill
is a tail that is wagging a dog.
The tail is that Supreme Court decision
and sections 12 onwards, and I have to tell you, I think
there's a breach of faith
with families, et cetera,
that is wrapped up in that part of the bill.
But that's just the tail that is wagging a dog, because there was
no other bill in place at the moment for sections 12 to
16 to find a home.
But sections one to 11 are a dog.
That is the worst piece of legislation that
is anti-disabled people that has been put before Parliament
in decades.
It is completely
counter to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
that the government in 2008 ratified on behalf of New
Zealand.
In 2008, a peg was put in the ground, we are going to
do better by disabled people from this point onwards.
It's my understanding, because I can't find anything in the public domain,
that MPs have not been given all of the advice from
officials that was necessary to tell you
how bad sections one to 11 actually are.
They take the rights and freedoms of disabled people
and actively strip them away
and turn those rights and freedoms into a burden on our
families.
And I might not be a person in receipt of disability support services,
but my dignity as a disabled person has been
questioned as much by sections one to 11
as any of the 50-something thousand people who
are in receipt of DSS today.
It's a breach of the convention with respect to Article 4.3,
because no one thought to work with disabled people before this bill
was introduced to the House. Don't worry about sections 12 to 16,
but even sections one to 11 could have been, should have been,
but was not
socialized with disabled people, our representative organizations,
or anyone actually out there in the real world who would give
MPs the advice you should have received.
It's a breach of Articles 19 and 28, which is the
core elements of making sure that we as disabled people get to
live independently, exercise choice and control, and
have an adequate standard of living.
This bill is counter to those rights that the New Zealand
government has already said
are New Zealanders' rights.
That's what was done in 2008.
And I invite you
to ask officials from Whaikaha,
from Justice, who has links with international
treaties, why
we have not seen anything in the public domain that questions
sections one to 11
and informs you that you should not pass this bill.
I suggest to you
that if you have any conscience whatsoever
about the rights and freedoms of disabled people to live a
dignified life alongside our non-disabled peers,
you will reject this bill in its entirety.
If you have any humanity,
you will reject this bill.
If you want to ever be able to say in future that you respect
disabled people,
you will reject this bill.
And I am very, very sure that you will be hearing
messages like that from various people who are
from the slightly affected through to the
fundamentally, "This is going to ruin my life."
I'm very happy to take questions, but I think the message I'm putting to you is
very clear. It's a dog.
Toss it out and actually be humans that can
show their faces in New Zealand for having respect for all
Kiwis, whether we are disabled or not.
Thank you for your time this morning.
Leave questions.
Thank you, John. Thank you, John. We
didn't leave enough time for questions, but thank you for making a submission
and sharing your views this morning.
Thank you.
Good luck for the rest of your day.
All right. Our next submitter is Sharon, also via Zoom.
Morning, Sharon.
Just
because of the old mute.
There we go. Yep, no, I got you now. Thank you. All right. Welcome.
We have five minutes with you this morning as well. The time is yours.
Thank you. My name is Sharon, and I'm here because of my
15-year-old son, Cantby. My son has mild intellectual
disability, autism, and ADHD. His greatest challenge is
not his willingness to learn, contribute, participate in
society. His greatest challenge is navigating systems that he'll never be able
to fully understand independently.
My concern about this bill is not theoretical.
It is based on lived experience. Over many years, my family
repeatedly sought help through education and health systems.
Too often support existed on paper but was unavailable in practice.
I removed my son from school, not because I rejected support, but because the
support he needed was not available.
We paid for assessments ourselves.
We became my son's teacher, advocate, coordinator, caregiver, because the
support he needed was not available when he needed it.
At times, I felt I spent so much time fighting the system and filling
the gaps, I had less time to simply be his mom.
That experience is why I'm concerned about the provisions that assume support can
simply be provided elsewhere. The reality is that the
disabled people can be left caught between systems while families carry the
consequences.
My other concern about the ministerial powers within the bill.
My concern is not that ministers have power.
My concern is that the future changes.
Sorry.
The future changes to the eligibility, criteria, funding setting,
purchasing rules, and support arrangements could be made through program or
regulatory changes with limited safeguards for people whose
lives will be affected. As parents of disabled children, we're left
with the question that never goes away.
What will happen to our children when we are no longer here?
Most days we focus on the next step, the next skill, sorry,
the next milestone, because if we spend too much time thinking about the future,
the fear can become overwhelming.
But we cannot ignore the future either.
For the past five to six years, I've worked every day to help my son develop
literacy, education, communication, life skills,
confidence, and independence after removing him from school.
Like many parents, everything I do is focused on helping my child build
foundation for a meaningful adult life.
That is why the future stability of disability supports matter
so much.
Support is not a cost. Support is an investment in independence,
security, participation in the community.
The right support creates opportunity, participation, and
independence. Every support removed today has the potential to reduce
opportunities tomorrow. Families provide invaluable
support, but families cannot be expected to replace disability support
systems.
Families should complement disability support systems, not replace
them. Supporting disabled people should be a shared
responsibility between families, community, and government, not
a burden that's progressively transferred onto those already carrying the
greatest load.
My son cannot read this bill, understand the future program
changes, analyze the regulatory decisions, or advocate for
protections he may need as an adult.
One day I will not be here to do that for him.
I ask the committee to judge this bill not only in how it affects disabled people
today, but how it will protect disabled people when their parents,
caregivers, and advocates are no longer able to speak on their
behalf. Thank you, and I welcome your questions.
Thank you, Sharon.
What would you say to
the
contention that the bill doesn't reduce or
remove any existing support, but rather it makes a
transparent legal framework for the way DSS already operates?
Well, the framework in theory does that, but there is no security
safeguards. There's no regulations included to show that that's what's going to
happen. So it's a good faith until you've put the rules into the
system. So what we're asking for is please put the rules in the system before
you create it,
rather than expecting us to believe that
you will put the rules in in good faith.
And it's hard to believe that when 18 months ago you just decided to put a
whole stop to things,
and that sits with the fear of parents. Like, we're left trying to...
I believe he's wanting to stabilize the system.
I believe in good faith that is what your intentions are.
But what's the intentions in 5 years' time, in 10 years' time?
The whole point of the act is to make sure there's protections for everybody.
Sup. Also sup or sup.
Yeah, just to coax up on that. I definitely hear the
concerns about the secondary legislation or the regulations, but
we
do have a ministry of regulation around-
Regulation making powers, and there will be a way in
which people can contest regulation.
And the other thing is, it will still be subject to a cabinet
approval, any type of form of regulation, and that is quite common
with any type of secondary legislation.
So I'm just wanting to make sure that you're aware of that as well.
But will any of those conversations include the people in the disability community?
Yes.
Yes, they should do. Yeah, 100%. Yeah.
Shouldn't it? No.
So why wasn't it done before? Why wasn't it done now?
That's kind of the question that's being asked.
Everything's being done after the fact, rather than
if all of this can be done, why we haven't advocated for it to be
done before the bill goes through.
Can I just comment on that?
After, yeah.
I'll just comment on that very quickly.
The minister has advised there were 18 months of consultation with
the disability community to stabilize the support
system and inform the principles of the bill.
So there was
consultation with the community.
Perhaps not to the level and extent that you might-
It wasn't the job being asked.
It wasn't.
I appreciate-
That's true
... I absolutely appreciate that that submission was done.
I submitted myself, but none of that was asked about this.
And I think that needs to be really clear. We all want a framework.
We all want security put in place. Nobody's disagreeing that.
But how it's being done is not what we were wanting.
We were wanting more of a let's work together and make sure these frameworks and
the rules that yous are setting within the frameworks are actually achievable and
workable, rather than creating something.
Like for example, my own situation with the education system.
It implies that if funding can be found within another system,
my son would not get funding. There is not enough funding within
the education system to fund my son.
So where does that leave the system?
There's no
guarantees written within what you have to make sure that doesn't
happen.
Okay. Well, thank you, Sharon. Appreciate you making a submission this morning,
sharing your lived experience with the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for everything you're doing.
Yeah. Thank you.
The next speaker is Christine, also via Zoom.
Morning, Christine.
Can see you, and looks like you're on mute now. So welcome to the committee.
We have five minutes with you this morning, so the time is yours.
Thank you.
I am immensely proud of our 19-year-old son.
He's the most courageous person I will ever know.
I have never thought of him as a burden.
The proposed legislation will change this, making him a burden on us as
parents, his only sibling, and our extended family,
or we will not be able to cope and he will end up in care.
What a choice.
People like my son are the most vulnerable members of society.
A perpetual toddler reliant on others for their every need.
Instead of protecting him and others like him, this legislation
discriminates against them and their families and whanau.
The proposed legislation creates the potential for a pass the parcel
scenario as family members burn out.
There is no person-centric self-determination for the person with the additional
needs or disabilities or their families.
Our choices will be more limited and not fit for purpose.
You are looking at passing legislation that affects approximately 1.6
million members of society, roughly 30% of the population.
The lack of publicity, transparency, consultation
and co-design is abhorrent.
The Enabling Good Lives principles introduced by a national government in
collaboration with the disability community are nonexistent in the
proposed legislation.
I cannot believe that our current government is introducing such a fiscally
irresponsible piece of legislation, which has the potential for huge costs
to the country, both direct and indirect.
By introducing means testing, existing supports for some families will disappear.
The burnout for those families not receiving ongoing supports will ensure more
demand for residential care homes.
This is by far the most expensive model available.
Close the legal loopholes which have led to the recent court rulings making MSD an
employer of some family carers. But I would urge you to stop the rest
of this legislation proceeding until proper consultation and
co-design with those directly affected.
If not, remove the following areas of the proposed legislation:
ministerial programs, means testing,
discrimination against family or whanau carers.
This legislation and individualized funding rules should not preclude family or
whanau members from being paid carers, as they are usually the people who
know how to care for the person in the best way and have their best interests
at heart. Until proper consultation can take place,
for those who need comprehensive care, implement a cap
for live-in carer employee payments through individualized funding to the
current maximum of 40 hours for family members.
This should be regardless of the relationship to the person with the additional
needs or disabilities. For these persons, additional
supports for respite, personal cares, vocational, et cetera, should remain in
place to assist the carer and avoid burnout.
Nationally standardized assessment based on need is positive, ensuring
all aspects of a person's life are realistically assessed.
You could introduce external verification or audits in various
settings, and that would assure that this process is robust.
If this legislation goes into effect in its current form, it will
break our family, and we are a really resilient family.
If it breaks us, it will have created carnage across society for
people such as our son and for all their families and whanau.
Thank you.
Thank you, Christine. Just on the income and asset testing
provisions in the bill, are you aware that the bill doesn't change
the current income and asset testing provisions, which have long been used in
a limited number of DSS supports?
Then why is it in there?
Reflecting existing practice.
Then that needs to be clarified. It doesn't actually stipulate that it's
only based on...
So what we're talking about, the bill talks about the fact that family and
whanau carers, and some of the discussion documents created by MSD,
that
family and whanau should not be being paid carers.
That's just not going to fly. You are going to break
families.
But I think that's the difference between being an employee of
MSD-
Mm
... and being a paid carer. Which I think, with the funding model, they
still get paid-
Correct
... but they're not employees of MSD. There's a difference.
The money is increasing.
That's right.
To support the family.
It's better.
Yeah. Karori.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission, Christine,
and sharing the story of your son and your whanau.
As opposition MPs, we have been told that we are
fear-mongering around
the changes to the DSS
primary legislation.
What do you say to that?
Well, I'm really pleased that you are actually sticking up for us because of the
lack of publicity around all of this, we're not even aware if the
opposition parties are even
going in to bat for us. No, you're not fear-mongering.
This legislation, I agree with the first submitter,
this is such a dog of a piece of legislation.
It should never have been written.
It's really badly put together, and there's no real detail in
it.
So until there's actual proper co-design and
detail across the board with all the people
affected, then no. Please keep sticking up for us.
No. Thank you, Christine. Can we just summarize?
Yeah. Couple of last things.
Yeah.
It's
unmuted.
All right. Our next submitter is Penelope.
Penelope. Sorry.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Welcome. We have finance with you this morning, so the time is
yours, fire away when you're ready.
Thank you.
Mōrena, and thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Penelope Wood, and I'm a full-time carer and mother of three children.
Our whanau is busy, diverse, and loving.
My eldest child, Abby, is 11. She is autistic, inventive,
and loves animals. She requires support to have her needs met both at
school and at home.
Our second child, Ella, is eight. She's full of energy, loves music,
dance, books, netball. She does not have a disability, but she grows
up in a home where disability shapes our lives.
Our youngest child is Finn.
Sorry.
He's five years old.
Finn is beautiful, determined,
and has a gorgeous smile.
He attends Te Whitianga specialist school in Dunedin.
Finn required urgent care after birth and was transferred from Dunedin to
Starship within 24 hours. Genetic testing revealed he has a very
rare genetic syndrome.
Finn has profound and complex care needs.
He is non-verbal, does not walk, is tube-fed, is partially deaf,
and has multiple seizures daily, some requiring medical intervention
and ambulance support. Developmentally, he's around
eight months old. Our lives are built around his care, medication,
feeding, personal cares, appointment, equipment, and being his voice
in every space.
Finn will need lifelong care.
My husband and I work as a team.
My husband continues to work in a very demanding job, but he also
provides significant care outside of work hours as well.
We decided early on that I'd become the full-time carer so we could meet all of
our children's needs safely and
sustainably. I am asking today for
two critical changes to Clauses 8 and 11,
plus
everything else of the bill to change, really.
I ask that Clause 8 is amended so that unpaid family care,
natural supports, or other resources are not treated as something that
must come first before funded disability support is available.
Families will always provide love, advocacy, and care.
But for families supporting someone with complex and lifelong disability,
the level of care required can go beyond what one household and
extended family can sustainably provide without support.
Individualized
funding has been incredibly important for our whanau because it gives us
flexibility. It allows us to choose support that works for Finn
and our family. We have one trusted person who provides respite.
She understands Finn, her stages, and our family.
This consistency and trust are extremely valuable.
Being able to use funding flexibly has also allowed me to be recognized for
the care I provide.
I stepped away from my career to care for Finn.
Being paid, even at a minimum level, has given me dignity and
recognition that my work has value.
This is not about replacing family love with payment.
It's about acknowledging the reality of disability
care. Secondly, Clause 8. I ask that Clause
8 is amended so that future changes
to the disability support system cannot be introduced without proper
parliamentary debate and meaningful consultation with disabled people and their
whanau. Funding stability is essential.
Families like ours need to plan for the future, for equipment, transport, care
needs, and what life will look like as our children grow.
When funding changes suddenly, like it has,
and this bill seems to want to create more uncertainty and
instability in that field,
we should not have to repeatedly tell our hardest stories to prove that our
children still need support.
The solution I would like to see is one clear source of funding,
one consistent system, and one pathway for disabled people and carers to
access support.
We need predictable, flexible, and secure supports.
Families like ours are often isolated and highly vulnerable, not
because we lack strength, but because the demands of disability can be enormous.
The disability system should reduce that burden, not add to it.
Please protect choice, dignity, flexibility, and stability
for disabled people and their whanau. Nga mihi.
Mihi. Oh, thank you, Panapali. Yeah.
Just on the, we've got a question from me on the,
you section-- Clause 8, which is around,
the bill
in terms of family support. Are you
aware that it reflects the current practice of DSS,
which has been in place for a long time to
consider supports already provided by the family, but it doesn't require family to
be the primary or the only source of support?
I think this bill puts it--
It gives a gray area. It seems to
present a picture that we shall be
dedicated 100% to our family and provide that without
the support.
Whether that's been in the past or not, but this feels like we're entrenching
it and saying that you shall reach the bottom of the system.
Support is there, but only at the bottom of the cliff.
That's what it feels like to me from my lived experience and from reading this bill
and what you're proposing.
Look, thank you for making a submission, and thank you for sharing the story of
your family and of the work you do looking after your family. Kia ora, Panapali.
Thank you for everything you do.
All right, our next submitter is Pip, also via Zoom.
Welcome, Pip. We can see you. It looks like you've got yours off mute.
So look, we've got you for five minutes this morning. Welcome.
Good morning. Thank you. I'm here with a group of friends and disabled
people
here in Palmerston North. My name is Pip.
Today I'm speaking as a parent, a disability advocate, and a member of the
MidCentral Regional Enabling Good Lives leadership group.
I'm not focusing today on the clauses of the bill.
I'm focusing on the human consequences of this bill.
You've heard many people say the same things in different ways.
I've sat in meetings for almost three decades contributing to the same
conversations, searching for hope and continued improvement of support
for disabled people and their families. We thought that we were getting there.
In 2017, the National Government primarily mandated the Enabling Good
Lives approach. And when EGL came to our region, I was very,
very cautious, knowing that I had already been part of many promises in the
past to improve the way support is provided for disabled people.
We have since then made so much progress, but this bill
undoes all of that work.
We know that this government has invested a significant cost to improving
services and support, but this is not just about the financial cost.
So I recognize that you have heard us, but please listen and please
understand and please use our voices to create what is happening
next. Significant consultation did occur, but
none of this consultation included anything that was in this bill
or that this bill was even going to be created.
We know that the minister- ... who agreed to this bill think that it is right
and they think that it is okay. But what is that saying for the ethical,
cultural, and conscious beliefs of people who think it is okay to
completely ignore the basic human rights of our most vulnerable people?
I can't speak for every disabled person.
Disabled people are not one group with one experience.
But I can share what I have heard repeatedly over many years.
People want to be trusted, heard, and genuine choice and control over their
lives. For decades, disabled people and families have
worked alongside governments to build a different future,
a future based on enabling good lives, and where disabled people are recognized as
citizens and not burdens. As experts in our
lives, as people with aspirations, relationships, talents,
and contributions. We fought for choice, control, and
trust, and we believe we were finally making progress.
That is why this bill has generated such concern.
You have asked what my biggest concern is.
My biggest concern is the shift in power this bill creates.
The power moves away from disabled people and whanau.
Power moves back towards systems, bureaucracy, and control.
As both a parent and a regional leadership group member, I hear the same
message repeatedly. People want partnership, not
paternalism. They want to be involved in decisions that affect their lives.
They do not want decisions made about them without them.
Many people and families already feel afraid.
Afraid to challenge decisions, afraid to speak honestly, afraid that
advocating for themselves may come at a cost.
Disability support system should be built on trust, partnership,
and respect, not fear. You have asked me what changes I want
to see. I want to see disabled people's choice and control
clearly protected in legislation.
I want support to be based on disability-related needs, not assumptions
about what families can provide. I want enabling good lives principles
embedded in the legislation in a meaningful and enforceable way.
I want disabled people and whanau to remain genuine partnerships
in decisions that affect their lives, and I want a future government's
prevented from significantly changing support through regulation without
meaningful consultation and co-design with disabled people.
But I also want to acknowledge another important truth.
Not every disabled person has experienced family as a safe
place. Some have experienced harm from family members.
Others have experienced harm from support workers, services, and institutions
that have been entrusted with their care. Their experiences matter.
That is why the answer is not forcing disabled people to rely on
family, and it is not forcing disabled people to rely on
strangers. The answer is choice, real choice, choice
that belongs to the disabled person.
You have asked me what my solution is, and my solution is simple.
Build a bill that trusts disabled people, protects supported
decision-making, protects the right of disabled people to choose who
supports them. For some of that will be family, and some of that it won't.
But both choices deserve equal respect.
As children become adults, they should be supported to develop their own voice,
their own preferences, and their own choices.
A good disability support service bill should protect that right.
Committee members, this is not a resistance to change.
We've had so much change over the years. We are exhausted.
This isn't resistance. This is grief.
This is grief over the decades of advocacy that have been slipping away.
Grief that trust is being replaced by control, grief that
partnership is being replaced by bureaucracy.
Before you make decisions, I ask that you think about the disabled people
who cannot stand before you today. I am lucky.
I have people in this room with me.
And think about the people sitting around kitchen tables worrying about the future
of their own families and their own children.
And think about the communities that have invested years and years of helping
build a more inclusive Aotearoa. At the end of the day, this bill is
not about funding. It is about people. It is about dignity.
It is about citizenship. It is about whether disabled people in
Aotearoa have the right to live good lives and direct their own
futures. Please don't take us backwards,
because that is what this bill will do.
All right. Thanks, Pip. Thank you for making that submission, and thanks to
everyone who's with you there this morning supporting you.
So yeah.
All right. Excellent. No, cheers.
All right. Our next submitter will be Peter, also via
Zoom.
I'll try and adjust this.
I know. Technology and all its spoils.
Yeah.
That's good.
Too much.
That's fine.
Morning, Peter.
We can't quite hear or see you at the moment.
I'm clicking on my video and it's not happening.
Oh, no. No worries. We can hear you.
Could I just say just at the outset, just as
Members of Parliament, we can't consider active court proceedings.
But look, other than that, we look forward to hearing from you.
Okay. And mine's pretty basic. I've put mine in the written submission.
First of all,
I'd just like to thank you all for being there today and to listen to our
submissions and to listen to what we want to say.
So
yeah.
What would I say?
There's legal experts that can argue the Bill of Rights stuff and
argue the human rights stuff that's happening
and
there's experts on that. But for me, it's about my daughter.
It's about also what I've been through for the last 20 years.
I was one of the plaintiffs in the Atkinson case, and we
were successful in three courts. And finally, in
2012, we got a decision to say that we were employee, we
were allowed to be paid. So under
urgency in 2014-- or 2013 rather,
Parliament rushed PAP4A through.
So they stopped people,
stopped us from doing certain things, and it prevented some of our human rights
activities and stuff like that. So that went on for quite a few
years, and then in 2020,
it was repealed by the Labor government, and then we had the
new system that came in.
And I started the court case around 2019.
So I've been involved with it for about 20 years and then been successful
recently as an appellant in the Supreme Court
with Christine
God. Sorry, I'm a bit nervous here.
Oh, no.
With Christine. So
it's taken us a long time, and I've been listening this morning about
people being told that they were consulted.
I've been involved in this case all the way through.
I'm a social worker, a qualified social worker.
I've never been approached other than legally about any of this
stuff. It's all been around case law, about taking us to court, about
fighting the next case. There's never been a plan B for 20 years.
And suddenly we've got to the end of the Supreme Court and they're saying now,
"Oh, we're going to pass this new bill that is very similar to the 4A bill."
It's only not done under urgency, but under a different source of
urgency that we have to get everything in very quickly.
And, so yeah, it's almost like deja vu for me.
Yeah, I would have liked somebody to come and talk, and I would have liked somebody
to go and talk to the 40 people of what- however the numbers are, that
were waiting at ERA, waiting for this decision-
Mm-hmm
... in the Supreme Court. They just waited for years for the
decision, and now they've lost all their rights to actually go through the
courts if this bill goes through.
So, around that, yeah, so that really concerns me that there's been
discussion because I have not been involved with it, and I've been on the
frontline of it.
Mm-hmm.
Just a little bit about Sian. She's extremely high needs.
She's 37 years old. She goes to a day service, and
we have a really good service where they take her out, they take her to swimming,
and they take her in the community and stuff, just like we do as
parents. Every second week we have a respite
break, and she goes away. I drop her off at 3:00 on
a Friday afternoon, and I pick her up on the Sunday afternoon,
and she sits in that house all those hours.
She doesn't do any activities. That's her respite service.
Somebody mentioned primary. We're not the primary or only source of support.
That's the support that happens in our respite. She just stays there.
She does absolutely nothing. She's a real social being.
She loves being out with people. She loves going to events.
So
that's one of the reasons we have never looked at residential care.
We want to do it ourself, and the government is quite willing to pay
for that type of service, but they're not willing to pay for parents
to look after their children. So,
it surprises me. There should be inspections of these places anyway.
And if you do complain, then you tend to be ousted as
a complainer or whatever, and there's all the issues that go on.
So there's that side of it. Yeah, so,
we want our daughter at home. She wants to be at home.
We've had to give up our retirement plans.
I've given up my occupation.
And our children actually had a very
difficult upbringing because we were always minding Sian.
Sian would have seizures, and she would go through all kinds of behavior issues
and things like that. So it's been years for us, and we've been doing it, and I'm
not sure why we're not getting paid for it, why we're not
employees of the state. When five judges of the highest court in the land
say that you are employees and you should be treated like
employees. I've just put in a complaint into the United
Nations, and one of the questions that was on there was, "Have you
exhausted all avenues in your country?" I have.
I've gone to the top court in the land, and five judges
unanimously said it was not okay to do what was happening.
So that's me, Peter Humphreys. Sorry, I was just coming to the end of my time.
No, no, no. It's-
But-
No, you used your time well. No, thank you, Peter, and appreciate you making that
submission-
Kia ora
... to us this morning. And obviously the care and
passion that you have for your daughter, it's brilliant. So thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for listening.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
All right. Next submitter by Zoom is Marilyn. Welcome, Marilyn.
Kia ora kato.
Mm.
Mine's a
technical submission,
and I will refer to the three key points that I
raise. The first is that this bill is based on no evidence at all
apart from the Fleming and Humphreys decision.
If you go back to the
Martin Weaver's report,
all the way through it says there are things like about, around so
many providers. There's approximately so many clients.
There are major gaps in data and insights to support informed
decision making. The ministry cannot forecast cost
accurately. There's a lack of real-time cost data.
There's no evaluation to explain this.
The report says we've not had the opportunity to consider risks.
The MSD regulatory impact statement says,
was there any information available to government to support the
introduction on potential costs and benefits?
No. The potential for any persons to suffer a substantial
unavoidable loss of income or wealth? No.
Officials cannot provide quantification for a national cost-benefit
analysis due to lack of data. Officials estimate such
and such. The lack of data on family carers assessing
flexible funding is unknown. It's difficult to estimate the
potential fiscal cost. MSD will have better data
about family carers, but it doesn't currently exist.
So along with that, you can say that in the background
documents, the court judgment is misrepresented, and there are claims made
without any evidence to support them.
Let me move next then to the question about New Zealand's
legislative content consistency with New Zealand's
international obligations. And it's interesting to follow Peter
because obviously he is talking about
the--
I hope he's talking about the opportunity
to look at the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Now, just very briefly, when New Zealand is going to
ratify such an important-
convention,
it checks article by article by article that their domestic
legislation is compliant. With respect to the civil and
political covenant, we already enter two reservations, largely
on the age of children who can be locked up with
adult criminals.
In this legislation, we
breach two key articles.
We breach Article
23-- sorry, we breach Article 2, we
breach Article 26, the two most important
discriminatory provisions. These are immediately
enforceable. Immediately enforceable.
That means today. So I'd like to advise those 30 or
so, or 40 carers that Peter was talking about, as of
today, since all of your domestic legal
remedies have been extinguished, you can
reframe the submissions you made to the ERA, and
tomorrow
you can send them to the UN Human Rights
Committee to find New Zealand in breach of two of the
most important human rights articles that are immediately
enforceable.
You're going to have heard from lots of parents and lots of people who
are carers who are going to be telling you about what their
work is about. If this bill had actually
read 15 years of court cases,
it would be framed in a very different way.
And it's obvious it hasn't been read that way.
Because I'm
thinking about one of the submissions yesterday,
which was from Daniel, who talked about the parents doing more
than 80 hours of unpaid care a week.
Mm-hmm.
Though he was also supported by Naomi and Sarah.
So from now on,
I want you to ask any family carer who appears before you
the following three questions. The first is,
do you feel free to cease providing your labor or
service? And they will say no.
Do we think you can independently and freely leave the place
or area where you provide your labor and services?
And they will say no.
Do you think that a carer who is restricted to a 40-hour minimum
wage week without legal protections of an employee
and expected contributions in the New Zealand workforce is
significantly deprived of personal freedom? The answer is yes.
And any of you paying attention will recognize that those three
questions describe servitude in the Modern Slavery
Bill currently before the New Zealand Parliament.
This means that those who are
full-time carers and who wish to use the optional
protocol and make to the complaint to the Human Rights Committee
tomorrow can also add the Civil and
Political Covenant's Article 8 on servitude
to their communication. Article 8 says, "No one
shall be held in servitude. No one shall be required to perform
forced or compulsory labor. The term forced or
compulsory labor shall not include any services
enacted in cases of emergency or any work or
service which forms part of normal civil obligations."
In my submission, I have given you the-
Sorry. I will have to draw to a close there, Marilyn.
We're well over time now
... Joseph, I'm sure you would want to draw me to a close. Are there any questions?
No. It's not that. We do have your written submission, and I just have to be
fair as a committee to all submitters.
But look, thank you for your advocacy for-
Helen, do you have a question?
... the communities, and we're well over time.
So thank you
I have been watching how you timed everybody, Joseph.
So-
Well, you can see
it for yourself there, Marilyn
We can definitely have a discussion afterwards. I would be very keen to.
The committee decided on the process.
Yeah. Thank you.
All right. Our next submitter is PSA Te Pukenga Here Tikanga
Mahi, also via Zoom.
Good morning and welcome.
Good morning.
You're appearing on behalf of the organization?
I am. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Welcome.
Kia ora.
We have five minutes with you. The time is yours.
Great. Kia ora, my name's Melissa Woolley.
I'm an assistant secretary with responsibility for the PSA membership working in
our community-delivered public services, including disability support
services. I speak on behalf of the PSA, and I'm here today
with PSA policy advisor Kirsten Wunderlich, who
will speak on behalf of our Deaf and Disabled Members Network.
We strongly oppose the Disability Support Services Bill as
drafted.
In December, the Supreme Court recognized family carers as
employees. This bill drafted is to circumvent and
limit that ruling. The bill's retrospective effect will extinguish
active employment proceedings brought after that decision, which is a serious
and unjustifiable step. Legislating to
undo a court finding in this way raises constitutional
and rule of law concerns for everyday New Zealanders and undermine their
trust in the government of the day.
By deeming many family carers are not employees, the bill
strips them of core protections, like the minimum wage, sick leave,
holidays, rest breaks, KiwiSaver, equal pay,
collective bargaining, and dispute resolution.
Clauses 13 to 16 and related provisions are
designed to exclude these people from New Zealand's minimum employment standards,
all to distance the Crown and providers from employment
responsibilities. This creates a two-tier workforce where
identical labor is treated unequally.
This is discriminatory and unacceptable.
The PSA is very concerned
About clauses 15
and 16. The scope for these clauses is very wide.
The only way that there has been significant improvements to the disability support
workforce terms and conditions have been by way of litigation that
the Crown has resolved as a funder of these
services, such as the sleepover case, such as in
between travel for care and support workers, such as pay
equity. We strongly oppose these provisions.
The regulatory impact statement confirms that there is no community
consultation on the specific legislative proposals, and this bill has
been rushed through on a compressed timeline.
That means that disabled people, whanau, carers, and
unions were excluded from the design and co-design.
The principle of nothing about us without us has been breached.
The bill entrenches gender and social inequality by
devaluing care work predominantly done by women and shifting costs
onto already stretched families.
I'll now hand over to Kirsten, who will speak from the perspective of our Deaf and
Disabled Members Network.
Kia ora. I'm speaking today for Glenn Walker, who is the co-convenor of
our Deaf and Disabled Members Network and who is unable to jump the
tech hoops to get into the call. So the PSA
Deaf and Disabled Network, made up of disabled workers across public and community
services, and from their perspective,
this bill infantilizes people with disabilities.
So it's clear that people with disabilities have the same human
rights as everyone else. And yet this bill requires
them to
rely on their families until all family resources are used.
That is rendering them children for life, and it's
completely inappropriate, and
it's not something that Parliament should be passing.
Over to you, Melissa.
What we ask the committee to do is the PSA stands with family
carers and the wider disability support workforce.
We advocate in partnership with disabled community, and we ask the committee to
recommend the House does not proceed with the bill in its current form. Thank you.
Thank you. We have a question, Marie Te Wano.
Morena. Morena tato. Kirsten, just to you, you've used the
word infantilize, which is an important and
probably unrecognizable in the context of the production of this
bill.
And then you interpreted it in this children for
life phrase. Can you just expand on that a bit more?
Because just that whole concept itself will be probably like, "What is
that expression?" Can you talk more about that?
Yeah. So if you're not regarded as an adult with a
person
who is nice and who has the ability to make choices about their life
and to make their own decisions, and you have to rely on
family, you have no choice but to do that.
No matter what kind of situation you find yourself in, perhaps with little to no
family, perhaps with a strong family that has the capability to support you
throughout your life, but perhaps not, perhaps an unsafe place.
This bill cuts down your choices and your ability to operate in the
world as an adult and to steer your own path in the future.
Well, thank you, Melissa and Kirsten, for making a submission on behalf of PSA Te
Pukenga Here and Mahi this morning.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is Matthew Whiting, also via Zoom.
Just needs to unmute.
I think you just need to un-- Oh, there we go. Welcome, Matthew.
I think you just need to unmute, and then we're ready to
rock and roll.
There we go. Oh, almost.
You've still got your mute. Oh, you're still on mute.
There you go.
There we go. Yep, we can see you, and now we can hear you. Welcome, Matthew.
Looking forward to hearing you this morning. The time is yours.
I'm going to share my screen.
Thank you.
Let's check that's coming through.
Just checking at our end that the screen sharing's coming through.
Have
we seen it pop up on our end?
No.
No, we haven't seen a screen share on our end yet, Matthew.
I
have cerebral palsy. It
means that me,
but
I can't-
Sure
... alright.
Oh, there we go. So it's coming through. There we go. We've got it now. Thank you.
Thank you, Matthew.
If people don't understand me,
can you please
get me to repeat myself?
Certainly. Yep. No, we've got you loud and clear.
Okay.
I'm going to start my
presentation.
Great. Thanks for putting that together.
You're better than many parliamentarians at this technology, you think, Matthew?
I'm going to cover four points
today.
Okay.
The first point is
the ableist approach of natural
supports.
The second point is the disempowerment of
disabled people with formal
supports.
And
the third one is the cost of
under-investment in
disability services in
every area.
And my last point
is
adequate consultation with the
disabled community and
their funding.
The ableist approach.
20 years ago, this
is me,
with me
moving out from the
institution. I hated
relying on
the goodwill of my
girlfriend at the time.
This was before
personal
care was a thing in crisis.
I had to use the natural
supports
to survive.
In my opinion,
the bill will take my
community back to
1986.
Disempowerment.
Well,
I think informal
supports before DSS
provide supports that has
funded
disempowered
disabled people. Informal
supports should be
a complement to formal
supports, not to replace them.
NDIS
participants had a history
of
disempowering
disabled people by
income testing supports, such
as
home management, or they have to make a
contribution to someone's
vital support.
Independent living services create
a reliance on provider and
can
reduce
independence
and reinforce
prejudices.
I write to the minister who's in charge of
DSS
to change the rules without
consultation through regulation to set
a dangerous
precedent.
Cost of
under-investment in...
My whole comment,
believing they
under-invest
support services more than
50 years causes
mistrust in my community.
I believe that the Woodhouse
Report would be a good start to
revisit them.
Often disabled people and their
funder are afraid to ask
what they need, as people are afraid to
lose what they have.
Adequate consultation.
Well,
I'm nearly 61,
and I can't-
I cannot tell
how many consultations
we took or surveys I done.
This is not a
unusual experience for us.
Often,
when
different
departments want to consult
their disabled community,
as we don't believe is a
honest
consultation.
Every person
in charge of these
consultations believe that
their consultation is
dealing with like the
ones in the 1990s,
before
the next government
in the '90s. It
did sounded
wonderful.
I object when
DSS say
they consulted
my community around
this bill.
Lastly,
I do believe we need a framework
for
disability services, but not this one.
And
Oh, thank you
for that, Matthew. And thank you for that submission.
And I take on board your point that you think there should be a framework, but you
don't think this is the right one, and also that sort of your comments around
1986, something for our committee to look at.
Can we get those- Could you share the slides with our committee?
Just send it to the secretariat. That'd be really helpful.
Oh. I have-
Oh, you have them
... already.
Oh, fantastic. No, brilliant. They'll share that with us. Good.
But look, thank you very much for making a submission this morning.
It was very good to hear from you.
Thank you. Thank you, Matthew.
Is there any questions?
I think you've made yourself clear, and
thank you for the written submission you already sent through and also for that
presentation you just made for us.
And I'll seek some more advice from officials around what the
comments you made around 1986.
Thank you.
So get some better context for that.
But thanks for raising that for us.
Yeah, okay.
Cheers.
Yeah.
All right. Next letter is Paul, also via Zoom. Welcome, Paul.
Thank you, Chair and committee members. My name is Dr. Paul Singh.
I'm the husband and family carer of my wife Jackie, who was diagnosed severe
young onset dementia at 58. Now 62, Jackie
lives in dementia level residential care.
I'm also speaking as an independent young onset dementia advocate.
Today, I want to focus on the main risks of the Disability Support
Services Bill as drafted. My written submission provides
more detail, but I want to state plainly that disabled
people and their families are the most directly affected by
this bill. This bill, if left unchanged, will diminish their
rights, dignity, choice, and control of their lives.
I support DSS having a clear legal framework behind it,
because disabled people and families should not have to rely on unclear
rules or change in practice affecting their lives.
However, I do not support this bill as drafted.
My biggest concern is that the bill does not start with disabled
people's rights, dignity, choice, and control as it
should.
Clause 7 calls DSS funded support a
contribution within public funding.
Clause 8 puts family responsibility first, where
appropriate.
Together, these clauses create a real risk.
What disabled people need comes second to keeping public support
within an arbitrary limit and require an increased family
capacity to meet these needs. If public support is not enough,
the gap does not go away. It becomes unmet need.
It may reduce a disabled person's independence.
It may limit their ordinary life, or it may be pushed back onto
family and unpaid carers.
Family support can be loving, important, and
wanted, but it should not substitute for adequate public
support. It should not be used to limit a disabled person's
choice and control.
The drafting and timing of the bill is troubling.
There are too many missing parts and unknowns.
Disabled people are asked to rely on spoken assurances from ministers
and vague promises about later work and a carer support package.
Furthermore, this bill came as a complete surprise to most in the disability
community. That should ring alarm bells for
the committee.
The people most affected by this bill were not given enough notice, let
alone properly consulted nor listened to.
The bill gives ministers powers now, but safeguards,
review rights, appeal rights, complaints, and supported
decision-making are left until later.
The carer support package is also left until later.
Domestic and international human rights and disability right principles
that New Zealand has agreed to uphold are not in the bill.
Disabled people
need these protections in the bill from the start.
I'm also worried about the precedent this bill sets.
While it does not directly change most Health New Zealand funded dementia
support today, it may later be copied into other support
systems, including Health New Zealand funded home and community
support and services, and residential care,
including aged residential care.
My solution is simple.
Withdraw and redraft the bill.
At a minimum, change clauses seven and eight.
Limit the powers in clauses 10 and 11.
Put rights and safeguards into the bill now.
Do not narrow legal rights for family carers before the promised carer support
package is published, consulted on, and funded.
In summary, a DSS legal framework is needed,
but this bill is not the right framework.
Disabled people deserve a law that starts with their rights, their
dignity, their choice, and their control.
This bill does not do that. Please recommend that it be withdrawn or fully
rewritten before it proceeds. I'm happy to take questions.
Oh, thank you, Paul.
Just a question from me, it sort of probably goes to the heart of this is, I think
there's a concern among people that there could be political decisions made in the
future that may have an impact.
But that has always been the case and what we've
viewed as a committee is that currently decisions are made based on cabinet memos
dating back to the '90s.
That can be a letter from a minister.
So all these things are highly subject to through political decisions, and
ones that were not transparent or accessible to the
disabled community and their support networks.
So I'm just curious, this bill actually makes that
framework transparent and reflects the current existing practice.
So just what I'm interested in your perspective
on that.
Is there a question in there, Chair?
Um- Sure, and I'm out of time.
But as soon as that bill reaches royal assent,
just like the Social Security Modernization Amendment
Now Act,
two days later, any minister can
make regulation or secondary legislation with much
less checks and balances.
So therefore, you can say all those
different
memos, et cetera, but at the end of the day, the
power that the minister now has if this
bill goes through is not
what is in either, as Marilyn
Waring just brought up, in the UN, um,
Convention on the Rights of, uh, People with Disabilities or in
the Human Rights Act or in the Bill of Rights Act.
Therefore,
this bill needs redrafting. These checks and balances
have to be within that, and that's all I have to say on
that.
Mm-hmm. All right. Thank you for making your submission this morning.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks, Helen.
All right. Our next submitter is Martin, also via Zoom.
Oh, good morning, Martin, and welcome to our committee.
So we have five minutes with you as well this morning. The time is yours.
We just-- Sorry, could I just pause you there?
We're not getting sound for some reason.
We can see you, but we can't hear you.
Uh- No, you're on mute ... no, you're on, now you're on mute.
No.
It could be his ears.
We're not-- Maybe... I'm wondering, and it might be difficult
with the headphone, but I wonder if you can maybe pull those out.
Maybe that's interfering with the microphone.
Try that.
Oh, there we go. Yes, that's it. Perfect.
All right.
Thank you.
Let me do that. Okay. Good morning, Chair and distinguished members.
Morning.
I have a dream today.
To my son, my name is Dad. Son who lives with disabilities, worried about this
bill.
I want to be known for my character,
not judged by my disability. I don't want my rights taken
away.
By passing this bill, we are explicitly
validating the American claim via the USTR that
New Zealand is guilty of exploitation of labor and modern-day
slavery. This directly entrenches the extra 12.5%
tariff on the d- that they're bringing
in on July on dairy, wine, and lamb.
It opens the door to even higher tariffs, including on beef.
This bill is being driven by short-term fiscal savings, yet it will cost the
country billions more in lost export
revenue and damaged international reputation.
Tourists and international students will not want to visit or study in a
country that legalizes the exploitation of
labor and the removal of human rights.
Years ago, when I was exporting machinery I had designed with my dad to
Japan, my key Japanese counterpart said to me, "You're
from New Zealand. When you return and get off the plane, you kiss the ground."
He was referring to his company's deep respect for New Zealand's
character, integrity, honor, and commitment to human rights.
It was precisely because of that reputation
that they wanted to build relationships.
Some years ago, my son and I were driving on an open road.
A family of ducks crossed in front of us.
We could not stop in time, and some of the young ducks didn't make it.
My son,
for his little robots, wrote an AI program that learned what ducks and open
roads looked like. When the camera saw the ducks on the road, it stopped the car,
sent messages to the following robots, and gave a loud warning to the ducks.
That same thinking is now in Tesla Full Self-Driving
It's a major mistake to underestimate the value to New Zealand
of those with disabilities, and of the families who care for them.
I won't discuss patents or anything like that, that he or my dad or anybody
has done,
but I think it underlines the point.
This bill exploits the labor of disabled people and their families for free
to fulfill the government's own legal obligations.
It deliberately removes their human rights, their right to natural justice,
and their right to appeal any decision of the government.
Rather than accept the Supreme Court's ruling, the government has chosen to make
the Supreme Court powerless.
Mm.
And in doing so, make the people affected by this bill
powerless as well.
We should acknowledge that these tariffs are very
real. By passing this bill, we are not only giving America a tariff
justification, we are actively moving in the opposite
direction of American values on labor and human rights.
The odds that we're here in discussing a bill that undermines the very
purpose of law itself,
while the main purpose of this bill was deliberately excluded from
proper public consultation, and that continues going
forward after your work is completed.
I want to add two things to that briefly.
One is
this is kind of a constitutional thing.
Mm-hmm.
And it's a precedent that--
It's a catastrophe
for the very acts of what you're doing in that select committee room.
My son and I drove down and he went into that room.
And the kind parliament
tour person pointed out that there was an eight-year-old boy who went there to make
a submission for his six-year-old brother who is
deaf.
As a consequence of that boy's submission,
sign language became our second official language.
Think about that.
I've got a question. Have you got a-
Instead-
No.
Instead, this legislation should be renamed.
This is my solution, and it's extensively granularized and
summarized in my written submission, and I urge you all to read it.
In fact, I asked as an accommodation, a formal accommodation,
that each member of the committee actually read policy my submission.
Instead, legislation should be renamed the Disability Support and Full Inclusion
Bill. It must recognize the Crown as the true employer and substance of
family carers, affirm full employment rights and minimum wage
protection, preserve all rights of natural justice and appeal, mandate
supported decision-making in line with UNCRPD Article 12 and General
Comment Number 1, and require genuine co-design with disabled
people and their organizations. Only by fully aligning with the Supreme
Court's Fleming ruling, UNCRPD, and BORA, can we
protect our international reputation,
safeguard billions in export revenue, and uphold the character and dignity of every
disabled New Zealander and their family.
I should add that Supreme Court 69, TUV versus Defense
Force,
the majority and the minority dissenting,
they all agreed together that
every single piece of legislation, administrative or policy decision, had to be
interpreted through the UNCRPD and the general comments.
By doing the very act of trying to propose this bill is a
breach of law.
That in itself-
Well, thank you, Martin.
I think we
are well over time.
Okay. Fine.
But-
Any questions?
Just for finish's sake. But look, thank you very much for making a submission.
We have your extensive written submission, which I think most members-
We have read
... and all have read.
Thank you.
So thank you for that as well.
And a unique lens. I appreciate that.
Mm. Very.
It's about the money. Give and leave it back.
Thanks. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
All right. Our next submitter is James, also via Zoom.
Welcome, James.
Yeah, we can't hear you for some reason.
You're not on mute, but-
Yeah. Yep.
There we go.
Problem solved. My apologies.
Yeah, no, excellent. Thanks.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
and fellow committee members.
Morning.
I'd like to acknowledge that you
put your accommodation in sending
those pre-written questions.
What changes would I like to see?
It says here that further phase envisioned
things be addressed such as safeguarding information gathering and appeals and
complaint processes.
While I understand we need a legislative framework to support this bill,
I consider those
factors that are considered to be
supplementary be much more important because
without safeguarding, there's nothing to actually support around
the security of how do you actually secure this data?
How do you
retrieve it
in an informed way?
Same with appeals and complaints.
How do you
structure it?
It's important to have a structure around those
bigger picture concerns rather than just leaving it a legislative background.
In terms of my biggest concern with this bill
is that
it mentions that it allows the minister
to
add supplemental bills.
That's great in theory, but unfortunately, well, not unfortunately,
I mean
Is in one way that, ministers
have various priorities.
And some ministers,
unfortunately, with
politics, one party comes in,
and then a couple of months later, or even less,
it gets changed around.
By allowing ministers to have
increased
this bill allows minister to have increased
sway over how day-to-day operations will be
influenced. So,
and now my solution would be, I guess,
rather simple.
Rewrite this bill to rather than
leave later safeguarding information gathering and appeals
and complaints versus add them into this bill,
or at least a start to them.
Do you have any-
Yeah
... I would open for questions.
Oh, thank you, James.
James.
Might ask you a question, and then look, thank you for making the submission
this morning.
Just on that point around the
minister's discretion. Currently,
ministers can change settings
with basic very little, if any, parliamentary oversight, and they can do it by
just a simple letter,
for example. So this bill actually creates a much more
transparent framework,
so there is probably more
constraint actually on a minister's discretion because of
that more transparent framework.
Is that something that you're aware
of?
I would like.
To a somewhat extent,
yes.
Thank you. Karaoni.
Thank you. Hi, James. Thank you so much for your submission.
Can you please tell me how you found out about
this bill and the
submission process for you?
Okay.
I
heard about this bill through Facebook,
and then I decided to actually
take the whole step and go through and make a submission
because as someone who is,
I guess, just to put my full cards on the table,
I may not be physically
obviously disabled, though I do have a non-visible disability, so I consider it
important to actually make my voice heard on this matter.
Last question, Helen.
Thank you. It's really coming off Joseph's question.
The issue about the-- we've had a lot of submitters tell us they're
very concerned that there are no constraints on the
minister.
Do you think that you would feel differently about this aspect of the
bill if, in fact, we put some constraints in on that
minister? And we heard one submitter talk about our
obligations that are international obligations.
Do you think we could build some constraints in on the
minister's
discretion, if we built that up, that you might feel better about
that aspect of the bill?
Yes, I would.
As with most
things, the devil will be in the details.
I'll leave it at that because I'm aware I'm over time.
Thank you very much.
No, it's fair enough. And thank you very much, James, for making a submission this
morning.
Nice.
Yep. Likewise. Thank you for your time, valued members.
Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Right, our next submitter is Shiree in person. Welcome, Shiree.
Pass that down that way. And that one.
And I'm sorry I'm loading up with more paper, but- ...
I want to make a point.
Excellent.
Great to have somebody in the room
Yeah.
I've come from Auckland.
All right.
Thank you for coming.
I've had my own experience.
Oh, well. We appreciate it. Thank you for that.
Just make my point clear for five minutes. You can tell me when to start.
All right. Can we get the-
Thank you.
We've got someone new on the controls trying to make work out
Yep. Jolly good.
You start and they'll get it going.
Okay.
They'll figure it out.
Good morning. My name is Shiree Mamasah, who reports even here.
For those that are not enlightened in this room, 24/7 care
involves things like changing your 22-year-old's nappy, wiping
his bottom.
For 12 years, he had a tracheostomy.
This meant he needed
care around the clock with a trained person.
In hospital, that was in PICU for two years.
It took two years before we could get disability support services funding
to enable him to come home. For 12 years, we provided
hospital-level care in our home.
Before I begin my oral submission,
I have passed the members a letter that was written to Minister Upston.
This was from my role as board chair of Complex Care Group.
Disappointingly, Complex Care Group have not been given an oral
submission.
The letter asks the minister for a meeting to discuss options for family
carers who provide 24/7 care in response to
the Supreme Court ruling.
Complex Care acknowledged that there is a fiscal risk to government, but
wanted to offer subject matter expertise to the minister,
but she offered a meeting in June and July.
She then launched-
A abhorrent bill about family
care and disabled people's rights.
I will now go back to my oral submission,
which is my opinion.
Firstly, I acknowledge that the legislation for DSS is needed.
No one is arguing that. However, I urge the committee to recommend that
the bill is withdrawn and completely revised in partnership with
the disability community. This includes family carers and
disabled people.
The number of changes that are needed would take longer than five minutes, so
I will focus on
my biggest concerns. My biggest concerns are the purpose of
the bill and the removal of employment rights for family
caregivers. I don't believe the bill has been introduced with a
genuine purpose in mind. Primarily, the purpose of the
bill is to focus and ensure that a potential payout to family
carers supporting complex disabled adults is stopped.
It also indicates to stop future employment rights of family
carers to reduce fiscal responsibility.
The intent of this legislation is about pushing more
responsibility on family to reduce
cost to the state.
Legislating to compel family contribution to care, while broadening the
definition of who counts as family.
You'll see a picture of my broad family here.
This is all of the people that may, in future, have to wipe my son's bottom,
22 years old. I ask you if you would like your cousins wiping a
cousin's bottom.
Families
are already contributing far beyond what is reasonable.
It is strange that the government wants to legislate family
responsibility, yet the bill contains no clear
causes setting out the state's responsibility.
Nothing about the UNCRPD.
Mm.
The bill is not designed to improve the lives of disabled people or to
safeguard or protect them.
Surely, the purpose of this bill should be to include
recognition of the rights of disabled people and their
families, and to ensure their safety.
I will now move on to comment on paid family care.
For years, government have chronically underfunded DSS.
Family have picked up the slack. I have been impacted by this
myself. Sapere Research did a report on family-funded care,
and
it showed that 75% of disabled people and
families did not agree with the number of hours of support
allocated. DSS allocations have long relied on
natural support from families. In this bill, this is reframed
as contribution to care.
Mm.
However, the state must recognize that there comes a time in a
person's life, I'm 60 now, my son is 22,
when is relying on family care no longer fair,
reasonable, sustainable for either the parent or the
disabled person? This bill does nothing to
address this reality.
I remind the committee that the Fleming and Humphries cases were
about families providing 24/7 care
for disabled adults.
Not children, disabled adults. The Supreme Court
verified what many family carers know to be true.
Supervision and being on call in your home is work.
It is work. I would like to go out to work.
I do go out to work now,
now that my son is an adult.
Many family carers are pushed into full-time caring because there are no
other options. The government is not acknowledging we have a serious issue
with support worker shortages. Minister Kirkpatrick, Minister
Pugh, this particularly affects people in rural areas.
I can't understand why you would support a bill like this.
The design of the bill reflects a profound lack
of understanding of the realities faced by people raising
and supporting people with complex disability.
I cannot see any benefits to the bill.
The bill should be rejected and redesigned with the disability
community, with a purpose that reflects disabled people and families'
rights. I'm aware I went over. I've had to have one minute
to point out that Complex Care Group did not get an
oral submission. Thank you.
You're all good.
I would love a question from the chair, though.
I would really-
Oh, thank you. We are well over time.
Mm.
We've given you about-
Thank you
... eight minutes, I think.
I'd love to take
your-
Okay
... questions on the budget.
Ah, excellent.
Mm.
Excellent.
Thank you very much.
Perhaps another day.
Another day. No, thank you-
Thank you for coming all this way
... for your magnificent submission. Thank you for coming out from Auckland.
Yeah, thank you.
Well done on your submission.
Thank you.
And all the prep.
Good morning. Anne, is it?
No.
Anne is on Zoom.
Ah, right. Okay.
I hope this thing allows into Zoom.
Oh, so Valerie?
I'm Valerie.
Ah, excellent. Lovely to meet you, Valerie.
I'm not an orthogram.
No.
Okay.
Well, wel- welcome, and it's good to have you here this morning.
Right. A little bit hot
in this place. Right.
Anne? Anne was to head on.
Anne Hawker?
I'm here.
Okay. Anne, you lead off.
Hi. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Hi, I'm Anne Hawker, and as you know, I'm with Valerie Smith.
We represent disabled older people who have been disabled
all or most of our lives.
And during that time, we have contributed quite a lot
of effort to make lives better for disabled people
A submission on this bill was really important for us.
So important that we did it while I was in hospital with
pneumonia and Valerie was in isolation with a
severe infection.
The bill is attempting to deal with two unrelated issues,
laying a legal foundation and
responding to the Supreme Court decision.
The regulatory impact statement
for the bill makes it clear and thinks together these two
things will avoid future lawsuits and
contain the costs of DSS.
We don't believe it will achieve either.
Because it is trying to deal with two unrelated issues,
it lacks clarity and is unworkable,
especially Clause 4 of the definition of family.
Further, it failed while being developed to
consult the very people it impacted.
This is a requirement under the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of People with Disabilities,
which New Zealand signed in 2008,
and the Cabinet Manual.
We are concerned at the speed with which the bill has been
introduced. The lack of trust, we are fearful of the
implications, especially around things such as
income and asset testing.
This is another attack on disabled people.
We've had enough.
As disabled people,
we want to lead a good life, as Matthew Whiting said.
We are not figures on a spreadsheet.
I'll now turn over to Valerie.
Hi, my name is Valerie Smith. We support disability
support service having a proper legal basis, but there
is no clear legal recognition of our rights as
disabled people independent of our families in the
bill. The bill also distorts the rights of
family members because it is preoccupied
with what paying in may cost the state, hence the
stress on family members and, in some cases,
ourselves being obliged to contribute in kind or
via income and asset testing before the state kicks in.
The bill is not clear on many aspects, and we've had some
good legal advice. For example, what qualifying for an
approved program under criteria Clause 11
(3) and
on the nature and cause of a person's disability, or Clause
4's definition of family members, what they really mean.
The long list of family members in Clause 4 was probably not
meant to say all of these should contribute, but the
unintended consequence is that it is perceived as
saying this. The lack of clarity on important things
such as eligibility and the definition of family members
is unsettling. You've heard a lot this morning and probably
yesterday and it's causing confusion and fears.
There is a perceived threat that unless we toe the
line and allow the current bill to go through,
something bad will happen in three years or maybe
earlier. We've been there before.
We've been here before. In about 1992,
government proposed income testing personal care.
I sat here beside a disabled woman in her power
wheelchair, I wasn't in one at the time, who had
worked very hard to get employment.
She needed personal care. She told this very
select committee, or what it was at the time, that the
unintended consequences of income testing personal care
was she could not afford to work.
In the end, the select committee, yourselves, you've a lot of power,
removed income testing of personal care.
The bill doesn't give for clarity purposes a definition of
eligibility. I had to hunt and found a
definition of current eligibility in the regulatory impact
statement footnotes.
We are concerned that this vagueness will mean a future minister, and you've
heard this this morning several times, will be able to
determine through secondary legislation
eligibility for DSS, what supports are funded, and
how decisions are made. This gives the minister immense
unchecked powers. Just a little aside,
primary legislation should be clear
and secondary legislation hook off it.
This is not clear enough.
Most families like my own did what they have to do at the time
in our best interest without feeling
obliged to help us. Other legislation talks about
families acting in our best interest, but not this
bill. I wonder why. I realize not everyone can do what
my family did for me, nor all disabled people become as
independent. But regardless, all disabled people
have rights and are human beings whose very
existence and rights need to be clearly acknowledged
in any legal foundation.
Nearly finished.
You're right.
This bill is not who we are,
nor who our families are,
nor the society we want to live in. The bill should not have
got to this stage without our input, and you've
heard that in practically every submission.
There shouldn't be a rush to push a vague,
tangled, and potentially dangerous bill through the
House.
We urge you all to be brave, whatever party,
and recommend that the bill not proceed, and preferably, that
it should be withdrawn.
Thank you. So we're open for questions, Anne or I.
Oh, thank you, Anne and Valerie. I want to kick off with a question.
So currently,
a minister, and for the last 30 years, has been able to change
things around DC support via a letter and
things like cabinet minutes.
This bill
aims to make things more transparent.
And with the secondary legislation, that has to be first
made publicly available before it can take effect, and it's also published
online, so it's available. And
finally, that it can be disallowed by Parliament.
So I don't know if there's broad awareness of that.
Probably not. But from what we've seen in our legal advisors,
it is not good primary legislation, and it needs to
change. It needs a thorough reworking.
Government in the past has worked quite a lot with disabled people,
haven't they, Anne?
Yes.
Like for example, when they drew up the New Zealand
Disability Strategy. Was done in six months, but it had
a consultative committee, and it went round the country.
We hadn't heard of this, and you've heard this this morning.
We hadn't heard until it was in the House.
And then we had two weeks to write a submission.
Mm.
Which we barely could do. Anne, do you want to say
anything?
Sorry,
can I just-
Yeah
... can I just ask, Anne, just would it give you more confidence being aware that
secondary legislation is publicly transparently
available for anyone to look at and can be disallowed by Parliament?
No, I don't think it will.
No.
Basically, because as we come back to, the primary
legislation isn't clear. If the primary legislation was
clear and workable, we would then be able to have
more confidence in secondary legislation.
But because the primary legislation is so
unclear and so unworkable-
And so reactive. Anne, sorry, interrupting you
...
And also it brings in a whole new
dynamics around
families-
Mm
... that we've had no discussion or input into.
And suddenly there's an expectation on families that there
has never been before.
Can I ask a question? It occurred to me, you have a unique experience of
having had a disability and coming into age, and
I wondered
whether growing up with a disability and the
relationship with your family
gives you an insight into how fraught that can become
at times as you develop independence and
how important your independence is.
We had an earlier discussion about a different piece of legislation
with young people and the estrangement that can occur in their families.
I wonder, could you just talk a little bit about the realities
of linking a disabled person to their family
basically forever? It's very difficult.
It is very difficult to be linked
forever. But they do their best.
I
was told I had to go overseas for an
operation when I was 15. In the end, my family lived
in Christchurch. My mother went up with me to Auckland, and we thought that
would be three months, and it was 11 months.
And my father and my 17 or something year old
sister batched down in Christchurch for that year.
My mother, who'd been a secretary, she ended up
cleaning the floor of the then nurse's home with
heavy polishes.
It was a cost to my family and to my sister,
and I was very aware of that.
Mm.
So-
I'd just like to add, and I know we're over time.
Mm.
I acquired my disability slightly later.
And I know I had
a child who was five months old, and I was unable
to stand, was completely paralyzed,
and my husband had to... We had no family support other than my husband,
and my husband had to take my son after I fed him to a friend's place
and bring him back. We got nothing from the state.
And the impact
and the pressure on having to manage a new
baby, a wife who was
significantly disabled,
was really very difficult for my
husband.
Well, thank you Anne and Valerie very much for coming and making a submission to
the committee this morning.
We await your decisions. When we're going to find out?
Thank you.
How long do you have?
What was that, sorry?
How long do you have to deliberate?
When is it supposed to go back into the House?
Uh.
13th of August.
13th of August. Thank you. There we go.
Good luck to you.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you.
I hope you take the advice-
I think you would know
... that people have given.
Right, the next submitter is Timothy,
in person as well.
Tino kui. Tino kui
koe.
Good morning and welcome, Timothy.
Hi.
We have five minutes with you this morning, so
the time is yours when you're ready.
Oh, thank you.
Kia ora. My name is Tim. I'm a tenant at-
I'm a parent of a young child with Down syndrome.
I want her to grow up in a New Zealand
where she can live in a fully supported
and have an equal life.
As drafted, this bill does not move us towards
that future.
I speak to
some three questions that committee has asked.
Why the hell? Sorry.
All right. Take your time.
What changes do I want to see in this bill?
The first change is the bill needs real legislative substance.
As I wrote in my submission, the bill leaves almost all operational
detail.
The bill lacks almost all operational detail,
including eligibility, funding settings, and how decisions are made to
regulations set by future ministers.
This means that the most important parts of the disability support systems
will be designed later without parliamentary scrutiny.
A framework without substance is not a system disabled
people can rely on. Far out.
Take your time.
Secondly, the family responsibility clause must be removed
and fundamentally rewritten.
The bill currently says that the responsibility for the disabled person while being
risked with the family.
In the first instance, where appropriate.
In practice, this means that a disabled person's access to support
could depend on whether or not the family
can step in. As I wrote, two disabled people
with identical needs can receive very different levels
of state support purely based on their family situation.
This is inequitable and
it embeds unpaid care into law. Third, the bill must not
override
the Fleming ruling. Instead of improving recognition and pay for
family carers, the bill is designed to prevent future
claims.
That is a step backwards for some of the most under-recognized carers in the
country. My biggest concern is
that the bill reduces rights and protection for
disabled people and carers, while protecting itself as neutral.
There are three parts to this. The democratic risk.
By deferring almost everything
to regulation, the bill shifts power away from Parliament and into
decisions that can be
changed at any time.
Equity risk. The family responsibility clause
support could vary based on family circumstances rather than need.
The legal list. By pre-empting
that ruling,
the bill asks disabled people and carers to accept fewer
legal protections than other New Zealanders.
As I wrote, why are disabled New Zealanders and their carers being asked
to accept less legal protection than the other citizens simply because
extending that protection would cost the Crown fricking money.
This is described as phase one,
but critical protection like safeguarding and equal appeal rights
are deferred to later phases and have no timeline.
Disabled people are being asked to trust the system whose
protections are not yet written. What my solution would be.
I propose a redraft of the
bill with real substance and
preliminary legislation.
Eligibility,
decision-making rules, safeguarding appeals, and information
sharing should not be left to future regulations.
Remove
the family responsibility clause so support is based on need, not
assumptions on what families should provide.
Respond to the Fleming ruling properly by improving recognition,
employment status, and remuneration for family carers rather
than-
Sorry, I can't see.
Rather than prevent further claims.
These changes would create a system that is transparent, fair and
durable. One that disabled people and their families can trust.
In closing, my daughter deserves a future where her rights are protected
in law and not left to regulations that can change
without scrutiny. And as I wrote in my submission, I urge the committee to
listen to the disabled people, their families and carers, and to
ensure this bill makes things better and
not worse. Thanks for your time.
Thank you very much, Timothy. Thanks for coming in to make your submission and well
done for getting through that. Thank you.
Thanks.
Cheers.
Our next submitter is Steve in person.
We've got a Steven Ferrar here.
Recheck if Steven has- He's on the call.
He just spoke just right. Okay. Yeah, thank you.
But I don't think he joined us. All right.
Well, let's come back to him if he was here.
But let's move to Christian then.
Thanks, Christian.
Welcome.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. All right. Well, we have about five minutes with you this morning, so
welcome. The time is yours.
Yeah.
Kia ora. My name is Christian Hörning.
I'm the father of Moritz. Moritz is a
15-year-old teenager. He is autistic,
non-speaking, also has epilepsy and
ADHD. And I'm here because I'm really concerned about this bill.
I think it could be really harmful to disabled people and
their families, disability community.
I think this bill needs to be
Stopped as it is and restarted with
genuine consultation with the disability community
and with their best interests at heart, unlike this bill.
I'll talk about two of my key concerns.
Firstly,
as my previous speakers, I'm really concerned about this families first
clause.
Mm.
Caring for a disabled family member
can be a very complex, exhausting, and
very enduring task.
In the example of our son, he requires
24/7, around the clock, at least one-on-one
care and supervision,
and will do so all his life. And even though he's still young,
this has already completely taken over our lives, me and my
wife, and to a degree, his brother.
It's really affecting our health and well-being.
It's extremely limiting our ability to pursue our own hopes and
dreams, like having a hobby, having friends,
work. What kind of work can we do, and how much can we work?
And so I'm really concerned that this proposed families first clause
could use our very existence as an
excuse for the government to reduce or
stop
government-funded supports for Moritz.
I think family support for disabled people happens a lot, but it cannot
be done safely without the mutual
consent of both the disabled person and the
family,
especially once the disabled person becomes an adult.
And our son will be an adult in two and a half years,
and like any adult, he should be able to freely choose
how involved he wants his family to be in his life and who cares and
supports him.
Don't get me wrong, we love our son dearly and
very happily care and support him
now to the extent that we're able to and for how long
we're able to.
But
it takes so much love, strength, and
patience. You can't take that for granted, and you can't
prescribe this through legislation.
Families need strengthening, so they can do this as much as they can.
You can't use this as an excuse to reduce
supports. And I think forcing
families to support
a disabled person against their will and beyond their
capacity
would just lead to resentment,
family members burning out even more than they currently do, family
relationships breaking down, and I think
all of this can also put disabled people then at great risk
of being neglected and abused in their own homes
behind closed doors.
So that's my first concern. The second concern is about the possibility of means
testing. As a family, we face the same
financial pressures as everyone else,
but our ability to earn an income is
much more compromised than it would otherwise be because of our care
responsibilities for Moritz. Example of my
wife, she basically had to completely abandon her career.
Mm.
She was unable to work for eight years.
Now she's working very limited hours
at a pay rate that is a fraction of what she used to earn
because the primary
task that we have is raising our son and his brother.
And equally, my own
career, I can only do jobs that allow me the time,
energy, and flexibility to also support our
son. So
that's compromising our ability to earn income.
On top of that,
we are faced with the reality that our son will not be-- Once he is an adult,
he will not be able to have his own job and earn his own living,
so we need to consider his needs and our
needs in our future planning, our financial planning,
our retirement, and so we're trying to save
a bit
for our and his future. And so if the government was to turn around and
say, "Now you need to use up your funds first before we come
back,"
we would basically be left with nothing for our retirement, nothing
for his future. And I think means testing DSS
supports would simply condemn disabled people and their
families to lifelong poverty and with no hope of working our
way out of this situation. Because the thing with disability is
it could happen to anyone. Our son didn't choose to be disabled, but he
is really stuck with this disability.
It's permanent and his support needs, as significant as they are, they're also
permanent. It's not like he can just do some training, find a
job, and then sort of work his way out of this situation.
And so because of this, and this is really a long game, and
we're very limited in our ability to adapt
to changes.
So what disabled people and families really need is
long-term certainty that the government will not
withdraw their supports and be there for them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Christian, for making a submission this morning.
No, thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Our next speaker is Kate. Also in person, Kate.
Okay.
Okay, we'll move to Daniel. Daniel Flay.
Mr Chair, I'm followed by my daughter and my wife.
Oh, great. Welcome back.
We'll set up together.
Good day.
Good morning. Welcome.
Morning.
How are you?
I'm good.
Do you want another chair or...
No.
While we're setting up-
Hey
... my submission.
For those who are new here, so that was here for Cerebral Palsy Society.
But I'm here in my personal capacity as a father of a 13-year-old daughter with
cerebral palsy, Indy.
My daughter's disability affects almost every aspect of our daily lives.
We've organized our lives around her support needs.
My wife, Amy, has given up her career to support our daughter and coordinate
her care. Together, we provide over 100 hours of unpaid support every
week.
Government funding sits atop an enormous foundation of unpaid care.
This already saves the government significant costs.
The question is how much more government can reasonably expect families to absorb,
and how that impacts a disabled person's independence.
We provide all the unpaid care we do because we love our daughter, but we need
support,
and we can't be her caregiver forever.
How many teenagers and young adults do you know who spend every day with their
parents? We want our daughter to have the same independence, relationships, and
opportunities that any young person should expect.
She has a human right to be independent.
A system that relies increasingly on parents and family risks moving in the
opposite direction. There's been a suggestion that the bill won't change anything
and simply codifies the current system. That is not correct.
Under the current system, support is fundamentally based on need.
Person's disability-related needs are assessed first, and then the role of
natural support such as family is considered.
The current system asks, "What support does this person need and what help can
family reasonably provide?" The bill changes that starting point.
It states that families have a responsibility, quote, "In the first instance
for providing support." This is a significant shift.
It moves families from being partners with government to being the primary
source of support before government support is considered.
That inevitably raises questions about the capacity and resources of family
members rather than focusing first on the needs of the disabled
person. The reality is that families, including ours,
are already contributing at or beyond sustainable levels.
There is no more.
Support will not magically transfer to family members simply because
legislation assumes it can.
There are also wider consequences.
Disability support does not just support the disabled people, it enables
their families to participate and contribute to society.
This brings me to means testing. It's been suggested that means testing already
exists, and the bill does not change this. That is not quite correct.
Some limited forms of means testing do exist, but they only apply in
very specific circumstances, namely housing and vehicle
modifications for adults. The bill enables means testing to be
applied across all disability support programs.
If means testing is to remain in the bill, it should be limited to housing and
vehicle modifications for adults.
Access to disability support should be determined by need, not by family income
or assets. Access to health or education services is not means
tested. Why should disability support be?
If means testing is introduced, families will face a
difficult choice. In my case, if I have to choose between remaining in paid
employment while spending my disposable income on disability supports,
or leaving the workforce to become my daughter's caregiver, I would likely leave
the workforce. But that would not be good for my family, my community
through my work for iwi, and charitable organizations, the economy,
or importantly, my daughter. The result would be a highly educated and
experienced professional would leave the workforce to perform work that government
previously supported. This is not an efficient use of
skills or good for national productivity.
Earning an income has also enabled us to spend tens of thousands of dollars on
disability equipment and other costs.
To conclude, disability support is not a wealthy benefit.
It's an investment that enables disabled people and their families to
participate, contribute, and thrive.
I ask that disability support remains based on need and that
government continues to meet its responsibility to support disabled
people and their whanau to participate fully in society. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thanks, Daniel. Warren question.
Thank you. Thanks for coming back, Daniel.
I take your point, we've heard it many times about the need to clarify the
means testing. I can refer you to the minister's first reading
speech on this bill, where she laid it out quite clearly.
But I wonder if you,
as part of your submission, are suggesting that we actually tighten
up the wording in there so it does clarify what it's used for, because it's
used for
vehicles and spectacles if they're needed.
And so those things are assessed already, and
that's what the bill is designed to do.
But it's clearly got quite confused.
Yeah.
Would you be happy with that clarification?
Well, if the premise is we're not changing anything-
Yes, it is
... that needs to be clear in the bill.
Yes.
Because it's broad sweeping, and it gives the minister broad powers to
introduce means testing to all levels of disability support.
Yeah. And that's not-
So I would support that.
Okay.
And that, I think, is what's causing concern for the
disability community.
Yes. Yeah.
You've been here a couple of days. You'll hear more submissions.
I'm sure you've got many submissions in writing as well that are raising these
concerns. And it's the same with the family. Some people call it family first.
I call it family substitution.
Yeah.
But the first point is that families are at their capacity now.
So if it's to reflect the current system, that's more about partnership-
Yes
... and disability needs first, and then how can family support-
And the minister did address that in her first reading speech.
But clearly-
Yes
... their wording in the leg needs a tightening up.
Well, right. Unless you go to court, and I'm a former practicing lawyer,
you don't look at
first speech readings.
But that's actually used in clarification if there
are any legal tests to be made.
Yes. But my submission is something like law now.
It should be in the legislation, and that would deal with a lot of concerns,
particularly on means testing.
Thanks, Daniel. We'll now move to India Rose.
We look forward to hearing from you, India Rose.
Okay.
Welcome.
Hello. My name is India Rose. I'm 13
years old. I am here to speak up for
myself and other people with disabilities.
My biggest concern is that
this bill is written to protect the
government and not the disability
community.
So I worry that the government doesn't care
about us at all.
It seems like they only think about what's good
for them instead of actually helping us.
The government doesn't understand because they don't have a
disability, so why are they writing this without
us?
Hang on, darl.
This bill is literally setting us
up for failure in the future,
forcing us to be dependent on our families is
just disabling.
It's going to make it impossible for-- to
live our lives normally.
You have a responsibility to protect
disabled people, but what are you doing?
The answer is just making it
worse.
Mm.
It's getting--
It's making it darker and darker for us and
for me. I'm starting to get left in the dark,
which means it's hard for me to trust in anything now.
Mm.
Please change the bill so the government
and families are partners.
This will protect my rights.
I want a bill
that gives me a life where I can be
independent, uh, so I can do normal
things like going out with friends.
Yeah.
If able people have a way to do that,
then I should too. I need my support
workers, and that's why it needs to be protected
by the government.
Give us the chance to rebuild this disability
world
together
so our future is safe. Thank you.
Tena koe.
Oh, well, well done, Indy. Uh, great.
It's awesome.
Thank, thank you so much for making a submission, and thank for your written
submission as well. As I read that you love both singing and dancing.
Yeah.
And so it's, it was great, great to hear from you and see you.
Um, Pareme, did you have a question?
Tena koe, tena koutou. Um, thank you for bringing your dad and your mum.
Mm-hmm.
Good on you, Rose, mate. Really, it's a, it's a comment to you
rather than a question. I mean, I think everything that you've said clearly
explains your view, which has to be the primary view.
But we heard from your dad yesterday, so that was neat.
But hearing from you,
I just want to mihi to you.
Mm-hmm.
Kua tae mai koe ki tenei whare. Na tenei to whare.
Na tenei whare. This is your place. Haere mai ra.
Tena koe, tena koutou.
Well, well, well done. And, and it was, um, again, um, very good submission.
Uh, you spoke very well and a very good written submission as well.
So thank you so much for coming and making that today, to us today.
Get that.
May the light, may the light shine onto him-
From you
... and from you.
You did it.
You've got a feeling it won't be the last time we hear that.
No.
Rose, fantastic.
She didn't take my job at Cerebral Palsy today.
Great succession, dad.
Mum, did you want to say something?
Yep. I've got one too, as a family member.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm here as a parent of Indy, who just spoke.
And I just have to tell you how proud I am of her-
Mm
... and how much determination she and our whanau exhibit in
the face of what's been relentless and significant life
challenges. That mana has been nurtured through the fierceness and
solidarity of our complex needs disability community.
But I caution you all, the emotional and health costs of that determination are
steep and preventable. Our whanau became a part of
the disability world through misfortune, like any person can at any
moment. However, I came in with the privilege of benefiting
from the tireless advocacy of those before me.
It was certainly a baptism of fire, but I was encouraged that we were moving
towards the vision of enabling good lives, a vision of independence,
partnership, com-- and community participation for disabled people
and their whanau.
We've heard that this bill simply codifies current practice, but my
experience tells a different story.
My experience with the current system is that government and families, we work in
partnership. Families provide natural support, government
provides funded support, and when the system fails, as it frequently
does, families, we step in and we fill the gaps.
My concern is that this bill changes that balance.
First, Clause 8 directly contradicts that partnership.
It enshrines in law that families are responsible in the first
instance before government support is even considered.
That is not partnership. That is families first, government second,
written into legislation.
Second, it broadens the definition of whanau and places greater
expectations on family. For people with complex disabilities,
that does not reflect reality. Extended whanau cannot just
simply step in and provide the skilled support
they require. In true independence, it means disabled
adults are not beholden to their whanau.
Mm.
They deserve the freedom to live on their own terms-
Not dependent on family obligations
Good. Families are already operating at beyond capacity.
We're already plugging system gaps every day.
My entire week is plugging system gaps.
There is no hidden reserve of capacity left to draw from.
And finally, the bill grants broad discretionary powers to any
minister without equally strong protections for disabled people.
In fact, it removes our right to redress.
Taken together, these changes create uncertainty.
Uncertainty about support, about independence, about participation in the
community, about rights. And that is my biggest concern.
This bill moves away from enabling good lives and towards cost-shifting onto
families. We've heard about the significant spending on
disability, but shifting costs onto families does not
balance the books. It shifts those costs into the health and social welfare system,
as families will fall into crisis and poverty with poorer outcomes for
everyone. It will not save money. It will move it because the
care needs do not disappear.
They will always be there.
So, I recognize that there's a problem that needs fixing, the court case made that
clear, and I want solutions too. But families, we should
not be required to sign away certainty and rights in order to solve that problem.
We do not need to become government employees.
What we need is legislation that recognizes the reality of complex
disability, preserves genuine partnership between families and
government, and protects the things that matter most to disabled people,
independence.
The stakes are simply too high to have legislation built on broad
levers that can be pulled at any time by any minister.
I do not think that is good law-making, and it is not good partnership.
So, the solution for me is to amend this bill so it contains
clear safeguarding principles. Those principles should protect what
enabling good lives established, independence, participation,
inclusion, and the right to the support needed to live a meaningful
life.
If codifying current practice is truly the intention of this bill, then
those principles must be written into the legislation.
Not implied, not assumed, written in.
My daughter is 13 years old. Her aspirations are reasonable.
She wants friends, independence, a job, and a life of her own.
If able-bodied children can have that, then disabled children deserve the same
opportunity. That is equity.
Please do this for children like Indy. Don't make their lives harder.
Most of them are already navigating more than any child should
ever have to.
That's my submission. Thank you.
Thank you. One question on more.
Thank you so much for coming, and thank you for your submission, Amy.
You said something really interesting in your submission around you don't want
family members to become state carers.
Yeah.
And we hear conflicting submissions-
Yeah
... around those that want to be an employee and those who want the
flexibility to be able to-
No.
The money. There's no doubt about that. The finances need to be there.
But can you please explain for your situation
what you would like to see, or what would be the most helpful?
So, for me, I do not wish to be a government
employee in my own home.
Mm-hmm.
That will come with lots of strings.
Yeah.
But I do wish to be supported to do this job that I was thrown
into.
Yeah.
The flexibility, enabling good lives.
The consultation was done.
The disability community were
on board, and it feels like that's just been completely forgotten.
But you have the information. The work is there.
Mm-hmm.
If we have a funding package that we can then use to deliver to me
and his needs, then that's what we need.
Okay.
Yeah. And we need the support and the knowledge to do it.
And,
sorry, I'm just conscious of the-
No. Thank you. Thank you, Amy.
Yeah.
Thank you very much, Amy, and thank you Indy and Daniel, much.
Very much appreciate you coming and sharing your family story with us.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Thanks for your time.
Watch out.
It's fine.
Hope you got some dancing in the near future.
Go sing it out.
Yeah, some singing.
Yeah. If he knows it. I'll sing it. You come.
Great. Kate, we had you before. We thought you
were in person, but you're on Zoom, so welcome, Kate.
Thanks.
Thanks for appearing this afternoon.
Yeah, it is this afternoon now.
Yeah.
So we've got five minutes with you. The time is yours.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
My name is Kate Beaumont Smith, and I'm appearing as the
mother of a seven-year-old daughter with Turner syndrome, who's registered
as disabled.
I've already provided my written submission, so I'd just like to focus
on the practical impact this bill could have on children
like my daughter.
The reason I wanted to appear is because I'm concerned that this bill, about what
it could mean for children with hidden and lifelong disabilities in the
future. My daughter has Turner syndrome, which is a lifelong
genetic condition. It's not something that she will ever grow out of
or would disappear. However, she
often falls into a difficult space where she's
recognized as disabled for some purposes, but not for others.
As a parent, one of my concerns about this bill is that it
creates uncertainty around who will qualify for support and how
those decisions will be made
Her dis- her condition is obviously for the rest of her life,
but she does not fit the public perception of disability.
Children like her may struggle to meet future eligibility
thresholds or funding criteria. I already
experience this across different government systems.
She is registered as disabled, as I said, but she does not
automatically result in support at school.
Because it's largely invisible, accessing support through the
school can be difficult. The impact of her condition is real, and it
does affect her daily life.
I'm also one of the school board members, and I see firsthand
that schools genuinely want to support children with additional needs.
Teachers and support staff work incredibly hard, but the
schools are often expected to meet those needs without receiving
resources families assume would be available.
As a result, we can find ourselves caught between different
systems. One system recognizes the child as disabled,
another
doesn't provide support. Another requires additional evidence,
another has different eligibility criteria.
Families are left trying to navigate the gaps.
The support is not based on need but what different
departments can afford. I'm also concerned about the
emphasis the bill has on the role of the family and whanau.
Families play an important role. I love my daughter dearly,
and I will always advocate for her, but I am
already my mother's daughter--
my daughter's mother, sorry,
advocate, administrator, support coordinator, and
case manager. And I do all of it unpaid.
But what can be particularly frustrating is being required
repeatedly to provide information and evidence for a
lifelong condition that is already well documented.
I am fortunate I have the skills and confidence to navigate
these systems, but I often think about the
families who do not. A disabled child's access to
support should not depend on how good their parent is at
navigating bureaucracy. It should be based on need.
The question I would ask you all is simple: Where would children
like my daughter sit under this framework?
She's registered as disabled, but she already struggles to access
support in some parts of the system.
When you deal with government departments such as WINZ, it's already a pretty
unpleasant experience. For example, every time we wish to go on
a family holiday, we have to justify it.
If we want to go and visit my family in the UK for more than 28 days,
we lose the right to financial support, and we're threatened with having to
reapply.
My mother-in-law, with her superannuation, can go on holiday for
up to six months without any question and doesn't have to fill out any forms.
We are often treated as benefit scroungers.
They treat you in an abrasive manner without kindness, empathy,
and support. You do not feel a human being.
Neither Holly or I asked for this situation to
occur, but I don't feel that this framework will
change this. I actually would feel that it would exacerbate that
situation. When I look to disability systems
internationally, particularly in the Scandinavian countries, I see a
stronger focus on supporting participation and reducing barriers.
My concern is the emphasis on eligibility programs and the
role of the family is just too much.
I would ask that you ensure that hidden disability is not
overlooked, that lifelong conditions continue to be recognized, and that
families are not expected to absorb even more
responsibility simply because they love their
children. I want a system that allows
parents, including myself, to be a parent and
not just a carer.
Thank you very much for listening to my submission.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
No. Thank you very much, Kate. We are at time.
So look, we appreciate you coming and making that submission, sharing your family's
experience and your experience with us.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Right, our next submitter is New Zealand Disability Support Network, I think.
Is someone in person?
Good morning. Good afternoon, and welcome.
Kia ora.
All right. We have about five minutes with you. Fire away when you're ready.
Kia ora koutou katoa. My name is Debbie Hughes, and
I am the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Disability Support Network,
representing around 170 disability support providers
across Aotearoa. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you today. NZDSN's written submission is
deliberately detailed. It provides a comprehensive
overview of the disability support system, a thorough
analysis of the bill, and a series of recommendations that we hope
will assist the committee in its deliberations.
The committee has asked three questions.
First, what changes do we want to see?
Our primary recommendation is that this bill be returned to disability
support services and redeveloped alongside disabled people,
their representative organizations, whanau, family carers, and
providers.
If there is an urgent need to address family caregiving and natural
supports, then those provisions should be separated and
progressed independently. The broader disability support
services framework should be developed properly,
transparently, and in partnership with the people most affected
by it.
If the committee is not minded to support either of those
approaches, our submission sets out a comprehensive
series of proposed amendments to strengthen the bill,
uphold rights, improve accountability and
safeguards, and ensure the system works in practice.
Second, what is our biggest concern?
Our biggest concern is the process that has brought us here.
Over the last 30 years, New Zealand has built a disability sector
with an enormous depth of expertise.
Disabled people, families, carers, providers, and community
organizations have helped build a more
inclusive community-based system.
Yet their expertise was not meaningfully involved
in developing this bill. Instead, the disability community had
just 19 days to become aware of this bill,
understand it, consult with others, prepare
submissions, and place those views before this committee.
19 days for legislation that will shape
disability support services for generations to come.
For many disabled people, time in itself is an accessibility
requirement. People need information in accessible formats,
support to understand complex issues, and time to discuss
proposals with family, advocates, and communities.
19 days is extraordinarily short.
No one would design a disability support system in
19 days.
Yet that is effectively the amount of time the disability
community was given to understand this bill and
respond.
Everything you are hearing through this process has been
achieved in just 19 days.
Imagine what could have happened
if the disability community had been given the time, information,
and opportunity to help design the bill from the
start. This is not a criticism of
reform. It is a reflection of the value of
partnership.
Finally, what is the solution?
Take the time to get this right.
Use the expertise that already exists within the disability
community. Work alongside disabled people,
whanau carers, Maori and Pacific communities,
providers, and representative organizations.
Test the proposals, understand the consequences,
and build confidence before asking Parliament to legislate.
The people you will hear from are not defending the status quo.
They know the system needs to improve.
What they are asking for is simple, that the people who will
live with the consequences of this legislation are given a
genuine opportunity to help shape it.
As committee members, you now have an opportunity to
ensure those voices help shape the outcome.
Behind every submission is a person, a family, a
community, or an organization that will have to live with the
decisions made at this table. The disability
community deserve to help design the bill.
The committee now has the opportunity to ensure they help
shape its future. It's not too late to put this right.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome your questions.
Thank you very much, Debbie, and thank you very much for the comprehensive written
submission.
Yes.
And also for an oral submission that sort of focuses on these three questions that
the committee asked. I really appreciate that.
Just one thing, and it may be--
Well, just with your background knowledge and expertise, which obviously is
extensive.
Does this bill
reflect current existing practice?
It attempts to codify it, which I think is a significant problem given
the history of disability support services and the
unsettling
policy environments that disabled people have had to live with, particularly over
the last 20 years. I think disabled people really deserve
primary legislation that they understand, they can rely on, and they can
use to plan their lives going forward.
I'll just
ask one last supplementary on that.
Just would having a
legislative framework that is accessible and
that all can access,
as well as secondary legislation that again, everyone can access.
Although I take your point around the timing of it,
would having that accessible framework that's transparent
be
ultimately an welcome?
We support the establishment of legislation, but we support that it is
legislation that upholds the rights of people with disability and is done
alongside them. So I think the secondary legislation does feel very
problematic at this point.
Does feel what, sorry?
Feels very problematic. It feels very arbitrary, and
ministers can come along and do a number of things, and
recognizing they can do that now, but also recognizing the issues that disability
currently faces.
Mm-hmm.
I have a supplement.
Sure.
You have been in the room when we've heard
submitters say that one of the things that the bill does that's different is
it tips that responsibility to the
family first. Do you agree or disagree with that?
I agree that's what the bill does. I don't think that's the right approach,
and I think you will hear from families who will tell you why.
The significant
benefit of disability support services at this stage is that it's
needs-based, so therefore we support people based
on their needs. This bill flips that and says
family first based. And it will mean that disabled
people have to come along and prove and establish that they don't have family
care, which is a deficit model, not a strength-based model, which the
disability sector has worked towards.
Thank you.
Just one last question. Just back to that secondary legislation.
Would you- Agree that it would give more confidence having rules that
are transparent, as opposed to currently, they're literally in
minister's letters and
30-year-old cabinet minutes.
And secondary legislation is both transparent and it
can also be disallowed by Parliament.
Mm. I think the concern with the disability sector about the secondary
legislation is how it would be-
Yeah
... understood by the sector. At this stage, we understand we'd need to be looking
at the Gazette and then encouraging parliamentary ministers
to take up an issue if there was one, and that's quite a big ask for the sector.
Well, thank you very much for coming and making a submission.
No, thank you so much.
Thank you.
Next submitter, I think also on business is the Standards and Monitoring Services.
Good afternoon, welcome.
Kia ora.
Yeah.
All right. We have
Lee, is it?
Yeah.
Oh, great. Well, welcome. We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
Thank you.
Fire away when you're ready.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Lee Henley toku ingoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on the Disability Support Services
Bill.
I appreciate these are long days.
I represent the Standards and Monitoring Services.
We're a disabled person and whanau-led evaluation and monitoring
organization. We're informed by Te Tiriti o Waitangi, the UN
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities, the New Zealand
Disability Strategy, and Enabling Good Lives.
We offer care matters through nationwide workshops and
resources. We educate and improve the wellbeing of family carers and disabled
people. We're also a founding member of the Family Leadership
Alliance, which works towards strong and equitable communities where
disabled people, their families and whanau are valued and
belong.
We support the intention of a clearer legislative foundation for
disability support services. That's important.
But we've got significant concerns about the direction, framing, and
the potential impact of this particular bill.
Our first concern is that the bill does not clearly position disability support as
a matter of rights.
The bill frames support as a contribution, and that has real
implications, because if support is seen as a contribution, it
shifts expectations about what disabled people can rely on.
We consider that the bill should overtly align with the UNCRPD and
reflect Enabling Good Lives principles, including choice and
control, mana enhancement, and ordinary life outcomes.
It should be clear that disability support enables citizenship and
participation.
Making that change would provide a stronger, more equitable, and stable
foundation for future decisions.
Our second concern is the emphasis on families and whanau as primary
sources of support.
We recognize the vital role of whanau, but from our
work, we know many are already carrying significant responsibility,
often with real impacts on wellbeing, income, and sustainability of
support.
The solution is not to reduce the role of whanau, but to strengthen the system
around them.
We consider the bill should more clearly affirm the role of the state to ensure
equitable access to support alongside whanau.
That balance is critical.
Our third key issue is participation.
Disabled people and whanau must be able to meaningfully shape the system that
affects them. At present, the consultation process has made that
extremely difficult.
The timeframe has been too short
to support accessible engagement, especially when our community
is already responding to multiple changes.
If we're serious about co-design, the process needs to reflect that.
It allows us to be proactive, not constantly
reactive, and this is key to rebuilding trust.
A practical step would be to extend the consultation period and to actively support
accessible participation through different formats, trusted community
channels, and time for collective discussion.
The bill should embed expectations for ongoing
co-design, not just one-off consultation.
And this is where evaluation becomes important.
If this bill is setting the foundation for the future system, then we need to build
mechanisms to understand how that system is working over time.
That means committing to ongoing independent evaluation that is grounded in the
expectations of disabled people and whanau.
It means creating feedback loops that inform continuous improvement rather
than waiting for issues to become entrenched.
Evaluation should not sit outside the system.
It should be part of how the system learns, adapts, and
maintains accountability.
Finally, we want to highlight the importance of getting settings right.
While the bill does not immediately change eligibility or funding, it sets
parameters for future decisions.
Small shifts in framing can have significant long-term consequences,
including restricting access, reducing flexibility, and
increasing inequalities.
The opportunity here is to get the foundation right from the beginning and to
ensure there are mechanisms in place to learn from how the system operates
over time.
In closing, while we support the development of a legislative
foundation for disability support services, the proposed
bill needs to be strengthened. It needs to be overtly rights-based.
It needs to maintain a clear role for the state alongside whanau.
It needs to support fair and equitable access to support.
It needs to enable meaningful participation, including through a more
realistic and accessible consultation process.
And it needs to include a clear commitment to ongoing evaluation and learning
grounded in the experiences of disabled people and whanau.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Oh, thank you very much, Lee. And thank you very much for the very good written
submission as well.
Yeah. Thank you.
And great oral submission. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
The next submitter is Alcohol Health Watch
We've got someone. Is that online, is it? Hi, Andrew.
Tena koutou.
Ah, good day, Andrew.
Hello.
Sorry. Said in person, but no, good to see you and welcome.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon. Time is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would like to, like all submitters, thank the committee
for the opportunity to submit orally on this important subject.
And I'm here in the stead of Lizzie Barrett, who was going to be in person, but
unfortunately is struck down with winter bugs.
The health, safety, and wellbeing of our children and families and communities is
important to all people in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Indeed, these rights are enshrined in several legally binding conventions,
including the UN Conventions with Te Tiriti.
Swatch have over 30 really big advocate for fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder, and we acknowledge the need for a legal framework for disability support
services funding consistent with the above
conventions and agreements.
Now, particularly, we think the government's responsibility to build a social
model of disability support and enacting Te Tiriti based partnerships with Maori
through policy processes is an important step.
We are concerned that the Disability Support Services Bill may
compound these rights issues, primarily the lack of appropriate support
for people with FASD and parents, caregivers, and wider whanau
supporting them.
At a time when health, social, and other public services are being
severely impacted, families are increasingly struggling to make ends meet, and
proposed measures are likely to direct increased
overwhelming demands, burnout, uncertainty, and anxiety that family carers
are all too often expected to deal with on their own.
So like other submitters, we implore the committee to recommend this bill be
reoriented to uphold the rights of people living with disabilities in Aotearoa, New
Zealand.
We stand together with experts and organizations calling for the
following recommendations to do so.
We would like to emphasize the need for an amended draft bill to be made available
for public consultation with a reasonable timeframe
following the initial select committee consultation.
Quickly from our submission, the recommendations are a statutory requirement for
government to co-design genuine consultation with disabled
people on matters that directly affect them.
The bill's extremely enabled people living both here and removing clause 11
[3] F and G, which will likely subject families
to means testing and clarifying the limits of family responsibility, including
to adult disabled people. Requiring all secondary legislation to
uphold the rights of disabled people and consider whanau and carers, and
introduce an accessible independent complaint system, ensuring people can
challenge funding assessments before phase one takes effect.
We also recommend the inclusion of an explicit provision that recognizes
the Crown's responsibility to Tangata Whai Kauha Maori,
which should aim to eliminate inequities between Maori and non-Maori,
and amending the DSS criteria to ensure people in whanau living with
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder regardless of DSS
criteria,
to
... Sorry, regardless of the presence of an intellectual disability,
receive crucial support services.
This should align with the social model of disability, recognizing that service
barriers, structural, attitudinal policy, infrastructure, et cetera, must
change to realize people's full rights to participate in society
as equal citizens.
Final recommendation is that the government works in partnership with family carers
to create a Te Tiriti centered plan for recognizing and resourcing their
work before
any reversal of Fleming v Attorney General.
This plan would be well-placed within the Ministry of Health's recent draft Mental
Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2026 to 2036,
and a particular priority on areas two and three, improving
access to support and growing and support us.
Thank you for again
Andrew, and stepping in to make a
great submission and thanks for the written submission as well.
I might just ask something on, I was noticing in the written submission, sort of
a concern about an unprecedented reliance on secondary legislation.
And I might just make a comment and then ask for your response to
that.
I'm just wondering whether it would give more confidence if people were aware that
secondary legislation must be published and is published online, so it's publicly
transparent to all. And not only that,
I am the first member of Parliament to
ever put a motion of disallowance forward to Parliament, which was then debated
on and then secondary legislation disallowed.
So that is an option that's always available, because I've been a member of the
Regulation Review Committee for almost the entire time I've been here.
So any permanent member of the Regulation Review Committee can file a
motion of disallowance, which then can be voted on and voted
down by Parliament. So would it give, do you think, more confidence if more people
understood that?
I think, Mr. Chair, and congratulations on being the first member.
That was going to be my question. How many times has that
secondary legislation been struck down or disallowed?
And my knowledge, having been a senior official responsible for
disallowable instruments in the past, was very, very few times. It was a tick box.
So, I don't think it would give
agencies like us, parents, carers, disabled people, that much
comfort in knowing that process is available.
But congratulations yourself on exercising that.
I
would like to see that exercised more. Kia ora.
I might have created a new convention. Supplementary, Laura.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Andrew, for your expertise and knowledge in
this area. One of the arguments for having things in secondary
legislation or in regulation is that it takes an awful long time
to get
Parliament to amend or change legislation.
So there's always that advantage in the secondary legislation.
Do you think there needs to be a balance there then between what is in the
primary and then what is in
the secondary so that we get that right?
I think so, and I think in this particular bill, there's a
very long-standing mantra, which is nothing about us without us.
And I think if- In a meaningful way,
people with disabilities, their whanau, their carer, their support services, and
organizations were involved in a approach plan that I think more
comfort. And I think that there is some regional prudence in
putting things in regulations. It's just we
are seeing
more and more go through regulations, which concerns us because, as we
have discussed, very few members take that opportunity to
disallow regulation.
Thanks.
Oh, thank you very much, Andrew, again for making that submission this afternoon.
Thank you.
And thanks for the work that Alcohol & Health Watch does as well.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
Right, our next submitter is Disabled Persons Assembly via Zoom, I
believe.
Mm-hmm.
Kia ora. If someone could please give permission.
I'm being told that
my camera has been disabled by the host.
Oh, righty-o. We'll see if we can solve that.
Get our secretary to see if they can work that one out.
We should also have Mojo Mathers, Chief Executive here as well.
Okay. That's online. Is that right?
Indeed.
Okay, great. You see Mojo Mathers?
Yeah. She's not coming.
She was here earlier, but no longer online.
Oh, she just come back on.
Okay.
We're getting there.
All right. Kira, we can see you now.
Okay, wonderful.
Great. And we're just waiting for-
Kia ora
... Mojo to come on. Oh, there we go. Excellent. All right. We have you both.
See you and welcome. The floor is yours.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Tena koutou e te komiti. I'm Kira Shawero-Regan, National
President of DPA, the Disabled Persons Assembly.
We're a pan-impairment disabled persons organization or DPO, and
today, I'm also joined by our Chief Executive, Mojo Mathers.
Thank you for the time today, though we would like to highlight our very deep
disappointment that several other major disability organizations
and community members have had their offered slots either
canceled or been denied outright.
CCS Disability Action and Complex Care New Zealand are absolutely
critical voices who have been excluded from this process.
DPA are also members of the DPO Coalition, which I currently
chair, and at the time of writing, I do not have confirmation of our oral
submission slot.
These exclusions are coupled with an incredibly short submission period,
timed during budget week, with another DSS engagement happening
at the same time, and are coupled with an inaccessible submission
process with a lack of alternate formats.
When briefed by Minister Upston about this bill, I should note that was a
meeting that concluded about 15 minutes before it went public, by the way.
I directly raised concerns with her and asked for her assurance that we would
not see a repeat of the Treaty Principles Bill fiasco, and we
ensured that she was aware of the need for an extended consultation
process. In this process instead, we have got
all of those concerns being materialized, and in doing so,
this really undermines the integrity of the Select Committee and democratic
process. Government's legally required to engage with disabled
people and our representative organizations, so this process not
only breaches the UNCRPD, but it's frankly insulting to disabled
communities.
Even disabled organizations who have engaged with DSS on other
processes were not made aware of this bill in
development, and its exclusion from the New Zealand Disability
Strategy shows it for what it is. Ultimately, reactive,
undemocratic, and poor lawmaking.
In the only five minutes we have today, there's simply not time to address all of
our points of concern. We believe our written submission addresses some of the
questions provided, so I'd really like to just pick up on a few points
from the hearing that we've heard so far today.
When it comes to budget, if the government was genuinely concerned about
budget, one of the best solutions would be not to waste time and
public funding developing a bill that the government already knows will
not work and already knows will breach disability rights.
You've heard from Peter, Marilyn, the Disabled Older Persons Group, and
others today that this bill is déjà vu.
We tautoko their comments and would like to add that in New Zealand's
2014 examination, the UNCRPD committee
already advised that very similar legislation breached the
disability convention, and we have notes on that in our written submission.
On secondary legislation and ministerial powers, we are deeply
concerned at how much of this bill is put off to secondary legislation and
to ministerial programs. We do understand the process of
secondary legislation, and it is not a substitute for shoddy
primary legislation in the first place.
When the process of developing this legislation itself has
been poor, has not been transparent, has not been engaged
with disabled people, it does not give us faith that
ministerial discretion will be in the favor of disabled
people. Good primary legislation should come before
restricting the avenues that already exist for recourse and human rights
complaints. And on that note, I would like to point out this
dangerous precedent we are seeing.
We are seeing a dangerous precedent in reactive and retrospective
lawmaking that bypasses the courts.
And on that note, I'll pass over to Mojo.
Kia
ora. I'm Mojo Mathers, Chief Executive for the Disabled Persons
Assembly. As Kira has mentioned, our submission
addresses the Select Committee's question And in summary,
we are calling for the bill to be withdrawn and
redrafted in partnership with disabled people,
not just tweaks,
so that we get the bill right.
Okay, and along with UNCRPD
principles and enabling good life principles, which we have
conclude highlighted this in our submission.
And the thing is, is that simply too much is at stake for
disabled people and our family. You have heard powerful
testimonies and submissions from multiple submitters today.
The concern is real, the concern is
genuine, and we urge this committee to hear
these concerns and to start again.
Recommend that the bill be withdrawn.
We
do need the legislation, but this is not it.
Kia ora.
Oh, thank you very much, Kira and Mojo.
Thank you for making submissions this afternoon, and we'll make some inquiries.
Those ones you've mentioned, Kira, we're aiming to hear from everyone we possibly
can, so we'll make some inquiries and find out what's gone on there.
Thank you. That would be appreciated because it's something we're hearing from a
number of people, and I just wanted to draw attention to a couple that were
particularly shocking to hear have not had that offer
of an oral submission continued. So would really appreciate
you-
Yeah. We'll look into that
... looking into that and extending the timeline for this process.
It's absolutely necessary for disability accessibility
and for your requirements under the existing laws.
Well, as a committee, we're willing to do, work long hours, and
we're doing that daily to hear from everyone we possibly can.
So thanks for raising that.
Thank you.
All right, our last submitter this morning for this morning's section
is Spectrum Foundation, in person.
Welcome.
Well, thank you, and thank you for this afternoon, and look forward to hearing from
you. The floor is yours.
Appreciate the opportunity. So chair and committee members, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. My name's Justin Walsh.
I'm the General Manager of Comms, Marketing and Strategy for Spectrum Group,
and we support nearly 1,800 disabled people in Whānau
across Spectrum Care, our disability support arm,
Homes of Choice, our community housing provider,
and Spectrum Foundation, our philanthropic funder.
I'm also an autistic man who lives with brain injury and father to an adult son
who requires 24/7 support. So for me, this bill
isn't abstract. It will have a direct and profound
impact on our lives. As an organization, we
sought feedback directly from disabled people in Whānau.
Their voices sit at the center of what I'll say today.
So much like many of the submitters, we support the bill's intent.
A clear legal foundation for DSS is needed.
A system should be consistent, transparent, and easy to
understand. But we don't support the bill in its current form.
Our strongest concern, mirroring many of the submissions today, is Clause 8, which
states that families are primarily responsible for disabled family
members throughout their lives,
and that people must rely on their own resources and those in their family and
communities before receiving support.
For families like mine, that's not a minor adjustment.
That's a fundamental shift. The response from the people in Whānau we
support was overwhelming. 96% opposed the idea that
families should have primary responsibility in adulthood.
97% opposed the expectation that they should exhaust their own
resources first.
Families already provide care, advocacy, coordination, support,
emotional and financial support,
transport. We already carry these responsibilities for years,
often for life.
In my own case,
the support my son requires is constant.
As families have reflected today, there is no gap that
we can simply step into further without consequence.
Family support should sit alongside public support.
It should never replace it.
Our second concern is that the bill removes recognition of family care
as work. Again, feedback from
people we support in Whānau was clear.
85% of Whānau opposed this, and 95% of our wider community
did the same. Caring isn't theoretical work.
It's real, demanding, and often full-time.
It comes at a cost to income, careers, and financial security.
Reducing recognition weakens the support system and ultimately
impacts disabled people as much as carers.
Our third concern is, as has been reflected many times today, what's
not yet in the bill. 95% of Whānau oppose key
decisions being made without further consultation.
In the wider community, that opposition was effectively unanimous.
If I leave you with one message today, it's this: families like mine
will always do everything we can. That's not in question.
But we cannot be the system.
A fair system stands alongside families.
It doesn't quietly shift responsibility to them.
These are fundamental questions of rights, citizenship, and
equity. We urge you to make the changes needed so that any future
law is fair, transparent, and genuinely shaped with
disabled people in Whānau. And I thank you for hearing my submission
and welcome any discussion.
Thank you, Justin. A question first from Helen.
I've heard those submissions repeatedly today, and I
was reflecting on the fact that I have three children who are
able-bodied. I was able to work, I was able to bring them up, and there
was a time when they became responsible for their own
financial needs.
Shocked me.
But you're not in that position, and a lot of the families aren't.
I wanted to ask you about that certainty of pathway
for the people who are disabled and for their families
of when there will be a movement to a
little bit more freedom in life. Could you just talk to
me about that?
I think for us, it's not so much a matter of movement towards more freedom as just
the movement towards citizenship for our son, for a disabled
person.
Got you. Yeah.
My son has the ability now to vote.
Mm.
He could try to join the army.
Yeah.
He's an adult in the eyes of the law.
Mm.
But if this law passes, it removes his rights as a citizen of
New Zealand to have full human rights.
So that's the question for us.
Beautifully articulated. Thank you.
Mm.
All right. Well, thank you very much, Justin. Appreciate you.
I know you've been waiting around for a while, so thank you very much for coming
in, making this submission today on your family's
behalf.
Thank you.
All right, members, we'll suspend for three minutes and resume at
1:00.
Okay.
Yeah. And then
I'm here.
Thank you. Thanks everybody for
letting me submit and share the views of Business New Zealand.
So I'm just coming along today to emphasize that we're actually opposed to the
amendment to the Copyright Act 1994.
On the face of it, this amendment, which allows the use of copyright work for the
purposes of parody or satire, is all about free speech and a
fairer, more democratic modern society.
An alternative view, and one that we are very concerned about,
is the unintended consequence that it is a Trojan horse for the
ability of activist organizations to legally bring
about brand destruction to legitimate brands carrying out their lawful and
legitimate business.
There are pictures of this in action, and I invite the committee to
go check them out on the Greenpeace website.
There's a whole library of brand
images there which have been manipulated to use
for activism and causes.
So what we're concerned about, really, that this will bring about unintended
consequences, which will create a new wave of emboldened
activism, which will require businesses that have previously ignored
the occasional transgression to have to fight for their brands in
the legal system.
Currently, there's no problem that we're aware of that the bill addresses.
New Zealand's Copyright Act already allows freedom of
expression through Section 42, which permits reproduction of
copyright works for the purpose of
criticism or review. The proposed amendment has not
identified a clear gap in the law and risks
introducing ambiguity to the fair dealing exemptions.
We're of the view that an area that has not been very litigious in the past
could become so due to the proposed amendment.
If it does open up the floodgates to political activists determined to raise their
issues using high-profile, well-known consumer brands for increased
impact, at the same time attempting to destroy the brands'
legitimate and lawful businesses, brand owners will be forced to
defend themselves. Potentially, a whole new field of litigation will
open up in a country that can ill afford the productivity loss.
We would rather that businesses were engaged in investing their capital in
growing revenue and jobs, R&D, new plant and
equipment, exploring new export markets, than fighting for their brand
reputation in the courts. We support free speech and the
protection of New Zealand's modern democracy, but we don't think this is
what this legislation creates. Thank you.
Happy to take questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Jamie.
With the issue around brands, is there a way of carving that
out if there's legislation like this?
I don't believe so.
I think that they are already
under the current law, they're already being
manipulated, and businesses have to decide on a case-by-case
basis if they're going to fight it or is actually that just going to amplify the
impact of the
activism in the first place. So I think oftentimes they'll
just
let it go, but I feel if it's made to be easier,
then they're going to have to actually step up.
So we could have a whole new area of litigation that-- And there's a
couple of examples in our submission from where that's happening in Australia.
What do you mean by encouragement for
people to go after brands?
Well, it just means you've got more permission to do
it. This is what this amendment does.
They might feel like there's a bit of a gray area at the moment, but this just
gives more permission to do that kind of activity.
Maureen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your submission.
I just wondered about the
judgment that's going to have to be made around these things.
How easy do you think that would be around
determining whether it's satire, parody,
or just activism, as you said?
Yes. And look, I think that's going to be very difficult, and it will inevitably
end up in the courts, which is what we've seen in Australia.
And that costs a huge amount of money and takes time.
Okay.
I think this, yeah, we are of the view that this will just create a whole
new area of litigation.
Yeah.
Mm.
So, the subjectivity of determining it will
end up being determined by the courts. Is that what you're saying?
Yes, and there's a court case reference in here
where it says it's actually quite a fine line, and it's
quite
sort of fact-specific, and some bits are and some
bits aren't. And I think it would get very complex.
My sense of humor's probably different to yours.
And Helen.
I have always been interested in the power imbalance in issues of
intellectual property. You've got this situation
where you've often got big businesses who will send a cease and desist letter.
Actually, they're sending them to a little one or
a person, an individual, who
is terrified of the threat that is in
that cease and desist letter. Do you
think that there may be a chilling effect right now,
which this piece of legislation tries to address,
just out of the gray, out of the fact that
big corporations, let's just take McDonald's as an example,
can just overwhelm any
freedom in this area because they don't like it
rather than that it breaks the law?
I can tell you I've had cases like that.
Well, they're actually on the Greenpeace website if you go and have a look, so
their
brand's already been
turned into a parody.
Yes, but I'm asking you about the principle of looking at that
power imbalance and the chilling effect.
You're talking about an effect of allowing, but
there's already a huge chilling effect on anybody who
wants to say anything about a big corporation, isn't there?
I think, not sure we're talking about the same thing.
If they're legitimately carrying out their business in accordance with the
law,
why should someone be able to attack their brand?
You talked about the fine line, and it is.
When you get into case law and you get into those fine lines, it's very expensive
to find out which way it goes, and most people's cautious
legal advice is, "I wouldn't go near that." Wouldn't go near them because
they're bigger than you.
So
sometimes we need the law to move to protect the little
guy in that way.
And so something like this, do you think there has been a chilling
effect on the legitimate use
that would fall if they went to court, might well find it, but they just can't
afford to do that?
I don't believe so. I think if you go through and look at the website I just
suggested, there's a lot of New Zealand iconic brands in there
that have been subject to this
activism activity.
And I don't think any of those have ended up in court
because like I said, a business has to make a judgment call as to whether-
Is it worth it?
... they're just drawing more attention to the activity in the first place.
So I think if anything,
they actually put up with a lot. And I guess what I'm saying is
if you make it easier, then they'll
probably be forced to have to go down the legal route to protect their brands.
And I guess one of my questions to the select committee is, of all the
things you could be legislating on, is this really
a big priority
for a country that has a productivity problem,
and needs to be
getting our economic activity back up?
And don't underestimate how many resources this will suck out of
business if it ends up
being spent in the courts.
Well, it was making a comment and a question.
It's a member's bill that's been pulled from the biscuit tin, and so that's how it
ended up in front of our committee.
So if I understand your submission correctly, and correct me if I'm
wrong,
you don't have any issue with people criticizing companies.
They can do that all they like. But you do have an issue with them using a brand
which they have registered, and it's cost them money to do so.
Mm.
And using that brand to then attack them.
That's right. Because it's their intellectual property that they've invested in,
built up.
It's a reputational issue,
and it's taken completely out of context, and it's
used against them essentially.
So that's the concern.
So you use the example that Helen used before for McDonald's.
People can, if they want to, can have a go at McDonald's and whatever, have a
debate in the public arena. But you're saying using
their brand-
Mm
... to do that is a step too far.
That's right. Yes.
And can you just tell us just,
you said Australia has had a lot of litigation about this.
Can you just briefly explain to us what
the
key takeaways from that are?
Well, I think the key takeaway is that it ends up in court, frankly,
because what's acceptable and
what is not acceptable is not
really easily defined. So that gets argued on a
case-by-case basis, and you'll end up, I guess, building
up court-
Case law
... court cases that will determine-
... how it ends up. Yeah.
We know a lot more litigation is your warning to the committee.
Absolutely, and this is
legitimate under the current law is what we're saying.
Parody and satire goes on all the time.
How much of it ends up in the court system now?
I don't think very much,
but-
Right. No, thank you very much. Thank you for making a submission.
Okay, thank you.
No problem. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
All right. Our next matter is, It's in the Ballot productions,
Sam, I think.
Mm-hmm.
Welcome, Sam.
Kia ora, everybody.
Welcome.
It's the first time we're in front of the Social Services and, was it Community
Select Committee?
Oh.
We're normally in Justice.
But, now-
It's because you're in trouble.
Yeah.
Sorry the submission comes a bit rushed.
It didn't go through our normal submission process that we do as an organization.
MP Todd Stevenson recommended we put a submission on this bill, due to
reflection on what happened after our coverage with the local body elections in
2022 that appeared in the review of the 2025 legislation.
So that's the reason why this is being put in there. Now, for a bit of fun part.
When we do the Audaco podcast, first time we ever decided to satirize
our MPs. As you can see, Kahurangi's there with googly eyes.
We gave Lorena Williams a mustache, because you might remember back in the day, you
used to get the newspapers and put dangling earrings on the men and mustaches
and beard on the woman. We gave our great friend Vanessa Winwick a
spot on Shortland Street-
... as being probably more qualified than probably most of the actors on the show.
Jenny-May Coffey got to be known as a newsreader.
I think she used to read the news on Nightline-
Yes
... back in the day. And then we gave Hana
ripping up the copy of the Treaty Principles bills at a Hobson Pledge meeting.
Because we thought that might actually be something that can be a bit relatable.
And Todd Stevenson,
he is a former ... pharmaceutical
employee and also a gay man, so we decided to put him at a World AIDS
conference.
A lot more here.
And so that's how we did that fun part.
But this has been the little tie So the
2023, no, 2022 local body elections, we
were the new kid on the block. Now, It's in the Ballot, when it comes to doing meet
the candidates meetings, we cover everyone
in that particular electorate, council ward, mayoralty
is invited, and other candidates are not.
They are welcome to sit in the audience and do that sort of thing.
Porirua City Council misunderstood that.
And,
to make it easier for people to understand what councils we were covering, we had
the council logos of the councils that we're covering on our website to state
that we're covering Wellington City Council, Porirua, Upper Hutt, Lower Hutt,
Kapiti Coast, Greater Wellington.
Partway through the campaign, Chris Costley from Upper Hutt City Council
contacted me to state that that's technically a copyright breach
by having the council, even that was used as an identifier information on that.
And we came to an agree-- and I said, "Well, also in our opening credits for three
seconds has each council logo." He goes, "Okay, well, that's going to have to be
removed." And I said, "Well, what about the old ones?" I go, "Because if we remove
that, that will be seen as voter interference."
And we came to the conclusion of, we don't touch the existing shows online, but
we put new shows within the next 48 hours, and we completely complied.
After that agreement was made, Porirua City Council decided that wasn't good
enough, and they wanted every and every single It's in the Ballot
show removed from record. Wouldn't say why, wouldn't sit there
and realize that we came to an agreement on that, and used the might
of the powerful council comms person to sit there and intimidate
a nonprofit organization with four people who collectively earned
together less than a hundred grand a year.
Mm.
And that was something in there. I rang Chris as soon as Porirua
City Council did it. He said, "Well, the agreement is not to touch the original
shows. I would say go and see Citizens Advice to go on that one."
We
gave a quick phone call to Community Law, and they've said, "Well, if that's the
agreement, stick with it, and if they chase it up, that's when you decide
to sit there and do it." So we didn't end up taking off the shows on there, but we
were pretty damn frightened and intimidated by the backing
of one council officer, which I'm not sure if the CEO did it.
Two days after that threat came through, Anita Baker, the mayor of Porirua City
Council, pulled out of the It's in the Ballot show covering the mayoral debate.
Now, here's the part that gets very interesting. People talk.
I heard that Porirua City Council, via a
sitting counselor,
made that decision based on we were, A, charging candidates to appear on the show,
which actually goes against our policies.
B, we were charging people to ask questions on the show, also goes against our
policies. And C, we weren't doing merged meet the
candidates, which is a complete misunderstanding of the format,
saying, "Well, you didn't invite Anita Baker to the Paremata Ward show candidates,
so you're breaking the rules."
Misunderstanding that she was invited to the mayoral debate.
And so
we've been on the receiving end of
a giant organization, in this case, the local government, who
has sat down there and has targeted us because they
failed to verify the facts with us correct.
They decided the wrong information was factually accurate.
They withheld the wrong information being told to us. Wonder why.
And then they sat there and destroyed a working relationship.
In 2025, because of that silly decision by that comms person,
all Porirua City Council was excluded from the coverage of
It's in the Ballot to ensure the council officer from that council
could not sit down there and interfere with our shows.
So we want to make sure that at least we, for the
sakes of three seconds on a video clip, shouldn't be enough to
not only use the copyright power law, but also in this case,
affect hundreds of candidates who participated in
the nature of goodwill from having their footage removed and their
campaign disallowed.
So we'd like to make sure that we actually have protection in place so that the
little guy is not targeted by poor decision-making.
Questions?
All right. Thank you. So my takeaway from your submission is that,
you're concerned about this being misused in a political context.
Correct. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. Or in this case, in a politically neutral context, which is what we are, is
giving every candidate an equal opportunity to appear on the show.
All right, thanks, Maureen.
Can I just ask then, in the scenario that you've given us-
Yes
... why not front-foot it and get permission to use the
logo?
It was beyond the point of repair at that stage.
We-
No, but before you even started
... we were advised we didn't need to do that
because we were news and media. So it was a conundrum that
the advice we got was probably not quite accurate-
Yeah
... in it because we were news and media, so it's like, well, it's appropriate to
have the council logo to distinguish it.
Since then, we don't do that at all.
Right.
So that is a decision that has been made.
It was the way it was handled was the problem.
If Porirua City Council didn't try to shut us down, we probably
wouldn't be quite as shy and timid as we were at the time.
Now, if they did that in 2025, it would've been a very different situation because
we're a lot more known now than what we were back then, because we're like the
new kid on the block.
So it doesn't prevent you from doing it again-
It's just we-
... if you get permission to use the logos.
Yes, but we probably won't go down that path at all.
Right.
And we're even-
But it doesn't prevent you from doing it.
No, no. And we're also concerned that if we take a picture-
Yeah
... on the side of the road of their council logo saying, "Welcome to Porirua
City," we're concerned that that would be considered copyright, even though the
copyright holding would technically be with the person who took the image, not the
council branding in the background of the image.
That's an interesting point, actually, because you have the right to take a
photograph in public of anything you want.
Yeah.
And that's something that
is a concern.
Okay.
Interesting viewpoint.
Yeah.
Any other questions, members?
Oh, I just think, you were at the last submission.
You heard this issue about the chilling effect.
Yes. Yeah. And it was-
You seem like a good example of what it feels like when somebody writes to you-
It was perfect timing.
Yeah. And there was an argument made
that if we do this, we're going to create more litigation.
But my concern is-
Mm
... if we don't do it, there's litigation and there's-
And-
... people stopping well before litigation.
80% of people stop because-
Mm
... they haven't got the money for it.
Exactly. And in this case, it would've disadvantaged, would've been
probably at that point, potentially 100 candidates who would all have to be
individually emailed across six different councils to say,
"This comms person requests to remove your footage
because it appeared here." And the only way we could fix it was a
full-scale removing everything, and we didn't have time to sit down there and
edit what would've been, at that point, about
20-something hours of footage.
Yeah.
There is a substantive difference here because the last submission was about
businesses who have applied for a brand license-
Yeah
... and built that up over time, versus this is a local government organization
which has a responsibility to its voters.
Voters, yeah.
Yeah.
And
doesn't have that same-
There's also-
... requirement, so there's quite a substantive difference-
Yeah
... that we need to take note of.
There's the issue of trademark and copyright-
Mm-hmm
... which we're mixing up a lot in this committee.
Yeah.
Copyright,
it's anything we write and create.
Mm.
Trademark is a process of licensing.
So I don't think we've been clear about that in the committee.
Mm.
Well, so we can talk it through and think it through, but yeah, no, it's
interesting.
Yeah, well, got to have the weeds-
Having an impact on
people who are running for a political position,
that's concerning.
Yeah, and I'm glad Todd suggested us to do that because otherwise we wouldn't
be here today putting in a submission.
Yeah, no, thanks. It's been very helpful.
And would you like to keep these as souvenirs?
Thank you.
Not me personally.
I'm fine, but
-
I'll take Todd's, then.
All right, well, cheers.
I'll take both. Yeah, yeah.
All right. Well, no, thanks for hanging out.
That's quite fine. I'll tidy this up in the office.
Thanks.
Anyone else wants to-
We'll need to-
... bring us?
... keep rocking because we've got a very tight timeline.
This is for you.
If we can get somebody on the other side.
Is this one to pass on to Hannah?
Yeah.
All right, cheers then.
No problem.
New Zealand Law Society, who's very next one, so okay.
No.
This is just copyright, right? It's not trademark?
Well...
Have we got the next person?
We hopefully got the Law Society.
For clarification purposes.
Good afternoon, we've got the New Zealand Law Society.
All done.
Do we have-
Yeah, they might help me on that.
Looking for Andrew. Andrew and Earl.
It looks like we might have Earl, given that...
That's the other way.
We're looking for him side on, but we can make that work.
Oh.
Got the wrong camera somehow.
Yeah, no, no worries.
Just crack on.
I'll just crack on with it. Welcome, and the time is yours.
Okay. We'll look this way. Apologies about that.
No worries.
Tēnā koutou.
I'm Earl Grey. I'm a barrister at Sangro Chambers, specializing in
intellectual property matters. I'm here with Andrew Brown KC,
also a very well renowned intellectual property
specialist.
We can't see the cameras. Can you see us okay now?
We can see you fine.
Yeah.
Yep.
That's great.
On behalf of the Law Society, I will first briefly relay
our primary concerns with the bill. Mr.
Brown KC will then discuss process in a little more
detail, and that will leave
as much time as possible for questions from members of the committee to
ensure we can best assist with the consideration necessary
in reviewing the bill's future.
First and foremost, the Law Society in principle agrees with the idea of
at least a parody exception, and believes there is value
in having such an exception in the New Zealand copyright regime
However, we have concerns, as you'll see from our submission, about
inserting an exception for parody and satire into the copyright regime
in the way the amendment bill does.
These concerns arise from the necessarily complex and important
rights and issues that such a proposed change brings and
seeks. The bill does not types of use that could fall within the exception
on which we have noted there are different approaches between the
UK and Australia.
The bill also does not address the interaction with moral rights,
cultural considerations,
whether any exception should be extended to include audiovisual
works and performers' rights,
whether parties should be prohibited from contracting out of the exception,
and if not, in what circumstances,
whether any use should be accompanied by an appropriate
acknowledgement.
In our view, it's not a simple task to make such a
change to a complex regime that has emerged over many decades of
implementation and precedent. It affects multiple
intersecting aspects of copyright and rights,
and is necessary to get the balance right from the outset rather than introduce
confusion to a settled regime.
The range of often well-reasoned views set out
in other submissions to the select committee bear this out.
There are reasoned views that support different approaches to each of the issues
we have just identified.
We further note that the issue of exceptions, including one for parody and possibly
satire, was being considered as part of the wider
MB Copyright Review process
with an issues paper which received 148 submissions.
As mentioned, Mr. Brown KC will now pick up on process
issues.
Right, thank you for that. So, as Mr.
Gray's outlined, the member's bill has failed to address a number of key issues
that were raised in MB's 2018
copyright issues paper, and that was a very detailed
97-question paper. And,
a number of the questions relating to fair dealing and
those defenses have just simply been left as part of that
review and never advanced further.
We've noted from the Law Society that there was a cabinet paper,
a cabinet minute earlier this month,
which records the government's intention to introduce legislation
on copyright reform, including a fair dealing exception for parody and
satire.
And
noting that particular development, the Law Society
is really urging that the parody or satire exception is
postponed to a government bill. And
the submissions made not just by the Law Society, but
by various other submitting parties on what's missing
from the bill,
are so extensive that we think the matter needs
to be reconsidered.
MB has been appointed by this select committee
to
consider this bill, so it will be able to draw on all of
the submissions that are being made
to this committee and give further policy input.
And
a new government bill will itself be subject to select
committee review, so there'll be a second opportunity, as it
were, for all interested and affected parties to have their say.
And we think that two-step process is the preferable
outcome,
particularly because some of the changes
that we're suggesting, and which
other submitters are suggesting, are ones where
the copyright community, both users
and
owners, have really not had a fair notice that these
changes would be needed. So that's
our basic submission.
All right. No, thank you. And I see that recommendation.
You've got a 7.1 there that it's only because of the much wider, more
detailed copyright review currently underway you recommend the bill not proceed and
instead encourage progression of the copyright reform bill as opportunity.
Yeah.
Yeah. Helen.
Sorry. I got my trademarks in
1990, I think. And that was my
last
time when I was involved in intellectual property law.
So forgive me for this question. But are we covering in
this proposal the issue of trademarks as well as
copyright?
No-
Or basic
... just copyright. Although, it's fair to point out that some
trademarks do have a copyright element.
As well.
So if you-- Yeah.
Yeah.
So that-
Gotcha.
Yeah. And-
That's where that would arise, yeah.
And did the
paper that was done, the issues
paper that you've asked us to work into, did
it cover more comprehensively the intellectual
property scheme?
Yes. It certainly covered copyright.
It didn't cover trademarks, but only-
So it still didn't. Okay.
Just picking up on that.
Trademarks are a different right.
They're registered for particular goods and services, and in
order to infringe, it needs to be used as a trademark,
and be used for those goods or services or different goods or
services. And that does mean that often parody and satire don't fall
within the risk of trademark infringement.
There are situations where there is that risk, but
it's less, I suppose Of a core
day-to-day question than the case of parody
for copyright.
If my imagination goes to the idea of a political
party's logo
being used by another political party-
She wants a T-shirt
... that would be one that would be covered?
Yeah.
Well, if-
If it was trademarked
... the logo
could be a copyright work, in which case, that issue could come up.
For a trademark use, if it was used by another political party in the
course of, I suppose-
Parody
... political party services, then there is a risk that
a trademark infringement claim could also arise because
Sorry, can I ask you, have you considered the issue of AI use?
Mm.
Certainly, it's part of every reflection on
intellectual property these days.
AI use, where the question I suppose might
arise is a lot of AI use is just simply
use of the work, not for parody or satire, but for other
purposes to perhaps use it in the background
to create a new work.
Where
you're at parody and satire, at least you're going to
see that the original topic
is reproduced, particularly in parody, perhaps not in satire.
But if somebody comes along and uses a
copyright work, and they've used AI to
generate the new work which they're proposing to put on the market or put
into circulation as a copyright work, well, then the party
that has used AI and put the work on the
market will be the party that's liable for
copyright infringement, and then in that context would fall to
be considered whether it's truly parody or satire or
not, as the case may be.
Just the last question I might ask is, and you referred to a number of things in
your written submissions, which was very helpful, but I think touching on the
Business Zealand's concern at the beginning,
at 4.1 you say, "The bill contains no reference to moral rights nor any guidance to
the moral right allowing a copyright owner to take action against derogatory
treatment of their work as maintained."
Yeah.
So I think that sits at the heart of this concern. Would that be fair to say?
Yeah, that's one of the concerns.
One.
There's about four or five other ones, and
there are other submitters, for example, Professor Graham Austin, who's written
quite a thoughtful paper,
has suggested a number of changes that would be needed to the
provision to bring it up to standard.
Yeah. No, thank you very much. Thank you very much for the written submission and
oral submission. It's been very helpful.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Our next submitter is APRA AMCOS
person, I believe.
APRA.
Anthony, APRA.
Kia ora koutou.
Kia ora, welcome.
All right. The time is yours, whai ra.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear. My name is Anthony Healy. I'm the head of APRA AMCOS New Zealand.
APRA is a member-owned music rights management organization.
We represent songwriters and composers and music publishers across
Australia and New Zealand. And here in Australia and New Zealand, we
also represent the rights of
our affiliated organizations around the world.
So it's an international repertoire that we represent here in New Zealand.
Immediately, we represent over 128,000 music creators and
publishers
here, Australian and New Zealand music publishers and creators.
So our role isn't just commercial in that licensing operation, but we
advocate on behalf of our members to ensure that their
rights and the effective copyright settings are to their
benefit to sustain New Zealand's creative economy.
Our perspective is pretty simple.
Copyright must strike a balance between the rights of our members,
the rights of creators, and the rights of the wider society
enabling expression.
In this case, we don't support the bill in its present form.
We recognize that parody and satire are very important forms
of expression. However, we don't believe that the bill is
supported by evidence of a clear policy problem.
We believe that the bill does create uncertainty to
the current system.
And we believe that the bill, as
my learned colleagues that have just submitted, Dr. Brown and Mr.
Gray, that the bill has been brought forward in isolation
outside the broader copyright review that we know is underway.
So our recommendation would be that the bill not proceed at
the present time but be considered as part of that comprehensive
copyright review, which we have been a part of and has
been happening in various forms over the last
five, six, seven, eight years.
In our submission, copyright operates as a carefully balanced system
of rights and exceptions, and they're both really important.
We have a functioning licensing
ecosystem,
which we sit at the very heart of often in the case of music.
We sit between users, and we sit between our members, the creators
themselves.
We don't currently see
a large number of examples of parody and
satire being prevented by current
copyright law.
The current fair dealing provisions do enable it.
There is a reasonably well-known and understood set of
definitions that surround those rights.
And
we see many examples of
Of fair dealing. Copyright works being
used in that way to make
those particular points.
So simply, there's no demonstrated
need to intervene urgently.
And whenever creating new exceptions, and we fully
support the fact that exceptions to the
copyright rules need to exist,
to balance between creators' rights and user freedoms.
But this, in a piecemeal fashion, is something that we wouldn't support
at the moment. The cultural context is ignored also, as the
previous submitters have mentioned.
We don't believe that the bill adequately addresses the treatment of
Mātauranga Māori or taonga works.
There are no safeguards for the culturally sensitive
material, and no clear recognition of collective interests or
cultural integrity.
Again, we would hope that this could be developed with proper
consultation and a fuller framework through that
copyright
discussions that are currently happening.
We do maintain that there are more urgent copyright
priorities . At the moment, as the government has come out and
said that there will be an extension to the term of copyright.
We sit a long way behind other comparable
countries around the world.
Where we only receive 50 years of protection
for copyright works, others receiving 70.
We know that it's about to change, but we would submit that
those changes are urgent and need to happen now.
Every year that we delay those changes, works
will fall out of copyright, and we will have this
strange
ghost scenario where certain works won't be protected,
and then works that were released or created a year later will be.
So, a recording that was
made in 1976 is about to fall out of
copyright and will not return. Even if the extension to
copyright term is made,
copyright protection won't currently return to those works.
So they will sit there unprotected in the public domain
forevermore. Even though a work, eventually when the law
is changed, that's released in 1978, it will
receive that extra years 20 years' protection.
Thank you. Two quick questions. One is
in your written submissions around that Mātauranga Māori and taonga
works. You said that risks unintended consequences in this bill.
Could you just give a sort of flavor of what those unintended consequences
could conceivably be?
I just think that there are unique circumstances around
the considerations of cultural works.
We are working towards systems at the moment of,
at least internally, collective ownership of works.
I mean, we see it in, for instance, the protection
of kapa haka,
where it has its own set of legal protections,
recognizing its uniqueness. Even though that work is out of copyright,
there are certain restrictions around the way that it is used.
Thank you. And the other one I had was just, again, in written submissions, and you
kind of touched on it here orally as well.
You said the world doesn't lack memes while they user-generated content of-
That's right
... you using copyrighted material online or on social media.
And, we are approached often.
There's nothing stopping it currently.
That's right. And-
Within the fair use provision.
Within the fair use provisions or
within the licensing provisions that we provide.
And we license works all the time for uses in a variety of
different ways. Some of which could be
arguably
in a satirical way, used in a satirical way, and they are
ultimately used with permission of the copyright owners if a deal is
struck.
Okay.
We have a submission. I'm not sure if you were here at the beginning.
We had one from Business New Zealand talking about productivity.
Yeah.
You've talked about there being a work stream here that
we're half-baked at, that there's more things.
Can you tell me, do you think that the fact we haven't got
that work done on reviewing our IP law,
is it actually getting in the way of our productivity
as a country?
Look, I'm not sure I agree with everything that
Business New Zealand said.
No. I'm not asking you.
You were talking about how there are other things that are important, and you
talked about the 70 years.
Yeah. Well, certainly the term, I think, is priority.
It's where we lag behind. And yes, I believe that that does
impact productivity.
Yeah.
It impacts our ability to earn off our creative
works, our original works that are protected by copyright.
And it impacts the way in which when something is
protected and there is some earning capability-
Mm
... that an industry is wrapped around that to
administer it, to protect it, and it's not just left alone.
So yes, without that, without these important copyright frameworks
locked in to the best that we can make them,
then yes, I think it does impact
general business.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate the submission.
Thank you.
All right. Our last submitter on this one, is Copyright Licensing New
Zealand with Sam and Daniel, I believe.
Good afternoon, everyone.
Good afternoon.
Fire away when you're ready.
Thank you. Mr. Chair, I'm Sam Evan, the Chief Executive of
Copyright Licensing, and I have with me
Daniel Waddison, a Legal and Policy Manager at Copyright Licensing.
So,
firstly, we'd just like to say we found the
first reading very interesting and entertaining.
There seemed to be cross-party consensus, as there is with most of the
submitters here, that there does need to be an amendment for parody and
satire.
There are some concerns. One of the interesting things about the first reading
was a number of the works that the speakers spoke about were satirical works, but
they actually
were original works in the first place, so they're covered by copyright.
So, I think what that shows you is this is a very complicated area, and I
think the first submitter also talked about-- and even this confusion around
trademark. This is a complex area.
We do, though, think that, and a number of the submitters, including even
the New Zealand law students, said they felt it was a bit thin.
And by that, we would point to the fact that it
needs definition.
Daniel's done a very good job of providing some of those, as have other submitters,
around what those definitions could be,
and how we could make the bill less thin.
I guess the other concern, and this
perhaps also reflects those views from APRA, is that
the Copyright Act review
continues in a rather piecemeal way.
So, further changes are underway.
We saw an announcement of that in recent weeks.
Some are urgent, and time is short.
But one critical change is not included, and that is enforcement.
And we represent a lot of sole operators, writers,
authors, small businesses, like publishers in New Zealand.
So, they have very little means of enforcing their
copyright.
And our job at Copyright Licensing New Zealand,
and we also represent artists through Resale Royalty,
Aotearoa, is to collect income for writers,
publishers, and visual artists.
And
we negotiate licenses with other organizations,
including large publicly funded universities and schools.
And we have perhaps in the past had to take measures to ensure that
they continued to respect copyright and paid for people's
work to be able to be distributed to a large
number of students and people within businesses.
But that's cost us a significant amount of money, and we're only able
to do that as an organization. Individuals can't.
We end up in the high court.
So, we included some thoughts on that. And so, Mr.
Chair, I recognize it's not the remit of this committee, but I think it is
important to note that that is an issue with not only parody and
satire, but the rest of the act.
So, I guess, thanks for closing. We do believe that changes to the
Copyright Act are best done at one time and in one place.
And we are the last people to remind the committee that
fragmented legislation is bad legislation.
We look forward to your questions.
Thank you. I appreciate that. And
it was touched on by some other submitters as well, we sort of haven't delved into
it really, but-- and no criticism on the drafter of the bill, but I know your
written submission points out that sound recordings and films are omitted from
this, which others have raised in their written submissions as well.
Mm.
And so I guess this is one example of this risk of a piecemeal
approach to this, is what we're hearing.
Yes, and the previous submitters as well, Mr.
Gray and
Mr. Brown, KC, noting that moral rights aren't
discussed. But certainly that's something that will have been discussed in the
issues paper, and the UK as well as also has considered that in their Hargreaves
report. So, there'll be different views on that, but it's something we should talk
about. And the previous speaker as well, another thing we need to
talk about is mātauranga Māori, where that is implicated by the
particular use. That forms part of the context.
And I suppose what's unique about us and the previous submitter as well is, we
started this talking about political speech, and here we are sitting in front of a
bunch of politicians. But if I can-
We are
... invite you to do an imaginative exercise, and you're all artists now.
A sculptor, a nonfiction writer, an autobiographer, a visual
artist, and this is now how you make your income.
It's how you support, you're a solo parent supporting your two children.
This is your business. So, when we're talking about parody, we're also talking
about the effect on your business, on your
livelihood, on your income. So, if I were to put to you
and ask you, what's the difference between plagiarism and critique?
You could probably answer that. We're all taught one is okay, one's not.
But if I asked you the more difficult question about this bill,
what's the difference between parody, which is okay,
and adaptation, which is not? Well, now we've got a
head-scratcher, and this bill doesn't answer that question.
Now, our submission provides some useful information, and I think if you look at
Professor Graham Austin's submission,
also the submission of the New Zealand Law Students Association, there's a lot of
commonality there where we've gone.
I mean, no real credit to us, but 20 years of case law going,
parody is not a blank check. It's not a
free pass to take your sculpture,
to take your book that's very popular-
Nonfiction, really important-
... on BookTok right now
... so I got it.
Keeping it
So, and just in that context, one book that's been very popular on
BookTok, just sold six million copies in six months.
"Fourth Wing," I don't know if anyone
knows.
Moving on. Romantic fiction. But if I were to put to you a
hypothetical, I don't know how many of you are using AI agents right now.
Yeah.
I'm playing with one at home. And I said to Claude Cowork,
"Hey, Claude, can you take 'Fourth Wing' and write me a parody and publish it to
the Amazon bookstore tonight?"
What?
Oh, yeah. And that's six seconds of my labor versus
six years.
Yeah.
Yeah. We certainly think AI should be included with any copyright
questions, and we have the lowest level of
trust in the OECD, along with Ireland.
And one reason for that is we just have a lack of policy.
Yeah.
And it could be very simply around copyright does relate to copyright,
to inputs for AI, and to training. Could be as simple
as that.
Laura.
Good point.
Jess, this is slightly off this bill, but kind of same on topic now that we've got
you in front of us. Have you followed the Hather
case-
Yes
... around the model whose image they believe may be used to be
generated-
Mm
... into other advertising? Are you able to share any thoughts, or do you think
that is exactly those gray areas with AI that we're talking about, or is this-
No, it's not gray area at all.
Yeah.
No.
You have a contract with that person to use their intellectual property,
as you do if you're a filmmaker using a book.
That's adaptation.
Mm-hmm.
With that, you buy certain rights.
Now, to say that using a copyrighted work in AI doesn't
involve acts restricted by copyright just flies in the
face of copyright law. It's not the way Europe's going, it's not the way America's
going. It involves copyright, it's copyright infringement.
Mm.
So
what's going on there ultimately should be determined by their contract.
Mm.
Did they purchase those rights?
Yeah.
And as I understand it, that model's gone well, no.
Mm.
And all copyright
infringement is,
is doing something without permission.
Mm.
Now, if you come back, you're all creatives again.
The solution to copyright infringement is just to ask.
Well, and also push back. We do need to push back on that because that is
theft.
Yeah.
So you're using something without paying for it.
That's true. Yeah.
Philip?
Oh, look, it was the AI question.
Nice.
So that's fantastic. You've done well.
Well, I agree. Thank you very much.
Yeah, thanks, guys.
Very good presentation there and I was listening.
I'm going to go and have a look at BookTok when I get a chance.
Very impressive.
Oh, yeah. Check out "Fourth Wing," everyone.
"Fourth Wing."
"Fourth Wing." Excellent. Thank you, Raj. Appreciate it.
That's it. Thank you very much.
All right. Well, that concludes our session for this morning.